About element verification tests 
 About element verification tests 
 This section defines the basic tests used to provide evidence that
 the implementation of the numerical model for the behavior of the elements in 
 Abaqus 
 produces the expected results. Verification of various print and file output
 options is also provided in these tests. 
 This page discusses: Eigenvalue tests Simple load tests Element loading options Patch tests Contact tests Interface tests Rigid body verification Connector element verification Special-purpose stress/displacement elements Miscellaneous tests 
 The test set is divided into categories as described below. 
 Eigenvalue tests 
 This set includes two tests for most element types. In the first of these
 tests all the modes and frequencies of a single, unrestrained element are
 extracted. The second test extracts the modes and frequencies of a patch of
 unrestrained elements. These tests verify the correct representation of rigid
 body modes and the correctness of each element's stiffness and mass. The tests
 also reveal any singular “hourglass” modes that may be present in
 reduced-integration elements. 
 A third test is performed to extract the natural modes of vibration of an
 organ pipe modeled with acoustic elements. 
 Only the number of zero-energy modes has been verified for the tests. The
 first nonzero eigenvalue is shown only for purposes of comparison. These tests
 are not performed for heat transfer elements and some other nonstructural
 elements. 
 Simple load tests 
 In these tests a simple domain, such as a rectangle in two dimensions or a
 rectangular prism in three dimensions, is discretized with the minimum number
 of elements. Sufficient kinematic boundary conditions are imposed to remove
 rigid body motion only. The loadings that are applied are ones for which the
 element being tested is capable of representing the solution exactly; for
 example, first-order elements are loaded so as to cause a constant stress
 state, while second-order elements are loaded into a linearly varying stress
 state. The results are checked against exact calculations. 
 Several such tests are necessary for structural elements (beams and shells)
 because of their complexity, and different tests are used for the elements that
 are based on the Kirchhoff hypothesis and for those that provide shear
 flexibility. The tests also include discontinuous structures (plates joined at
 an angle and frames) to test defining discontinuous normals, and they include
 shells and membranes with variable thickness. The local coordinate definitions
 are verified in some tests. 
 The problem descriptions contain the solution with which the results are
 compared. Where analytical solutions are not available, alternative numerical
 solutions are used. 
 Element loading options 
 In these tests the distributed loadings provided for each element are
 verified by checking the equivalent nodal forces, fluxes, or charges that are
 calculated for each load type. All degrees of freedom are suppressed, and the
 various distributed loadings offered for the element type are applied in a
 series of steps. The reactions are verified against exact calculation for the
 interpolation function. The values of the output variables presented are
 “exact” in the finite element sense and, unless noted otherwise, are also exact
 in the analytical sense. 
 To check thermal loading, free and constrained thermal expansions of
 elements are also tested. Thermal loads are defined by giving the temperature,
 θ ,
 along with a nonzero thermal expansion coefficient. 
 Generalized plane strain elements have an additional reference node
 associated with the generalized plane strain condition. Depending on the
 particular test, degrees of freedom u z ,
 ϕ x ,
 and ϕ y 
 of the generalized plane strain reference node are constrained or left free. 
 Patch tests 
 The patch test requires that, for an arbitrary “patch” of elements, when a
 solution corresponding to a state of constant strain throughout the patch is
 prescribed on the boundary of the patch, the constant strain state must be
 obtained as the solution at all strain calculation points throughout the patch.
 For heat transfer elements the patch test requires that constant temperature
 gradients are calculated throughout the patch when the temperatures
 corresponding to the constant gradient solution are prescribed on the boundary.
 The acoustic elements are similarly tested for constant pressure gradients, and
 the thermal-electrical elements are tested for constant potential gradients. 
 The patch test is generally considered to be a necessary and sufficient
 condition for convergence of the solution as the element size is reduced,
 except for shell elements of the type used in 
 Abaqus ,
 for which the test is not rigorously required, but for which it is commonly
 accepted as a valuable indicator of the element's quality. Thus, this test
 plays a key role in the verification process. 
 In the patch tests done in 
 Abaqus 
 a patch is defined as a mesh with at least one interior element and several
 interior nodes. The elements in the patch are nonrectangular, although element
 edges are kept straight. (Second-order elements do not always pass the patch
 test if their edges are not straight.) The shell elements are tested for plate
 and cylindrical patches only. 
 Basic verification of the geometric nonlinearity capability is included in
 these tests by prescribing large rigid body rotations of the models under
 states of constant strain and verifying the invariance of the solution with
 respect to the rotation. 
 Contact tests 
 This section contains tests of the various contact capabilities available in
 Abaqus .
 Interface tests 
 This section contains tests of the various interface capabilities available
 in 
 Abaqus .
 This category currently consists of modeling surface interface conditions in
 heat transfer problems, coupled acoustic-structural problems, coupled
 thermal-electrical problems, and friction. 
 Rigid body verification 
 This section contains tests of the rigid body elements available in 
 Abaqus/Explicit .
 Connector element verification 
 This section contains tests of the connector elements available in 
 Abaqus .
 Special-purpose stress/displacement elements 
 This section describes tests of some of the special-purpose
 stress/displacement elements available in 
 Abaqus 
 that are not tested in other sections of this guide.
 SPRING - and MASS -type elements are tested with the eigenvalue frequency analyses
 of 
 Eigenvalue extraction for single unconstrained elements .
 ELBOW -type elements are also tested in 
 Eigenvalue extraction for single unconstrained elements ,
 as well as in the simple load test described in 
 Verification of beam elements and section types 
 and the distributed load test described in 
 ELBOW elements .
 GAP -type elements are tested with the contact elements, as described
 in 
 Contact between discrete points .
 Miscellaneous tests 
 This category contains tests of the rebar options, transport of a
 temperature pulse in convection elements, transverse shear for shear-flexible
 shells, and linear dynamic analyses with fluid link elements.