Composite shells in cylindrical bending 
 Composite shells in cylindrical bending 
 This example verifies the transverse shear stress calculations in 
 Abaqus 
 for multilayer composite shells and demonstrates the use of the plane stress
 orthotropic failure measures. 
 A discussion of the transverse shear stresses obtained by
 composite solids in 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 is included in this example. The problem consists of a two- or three-layer
 plate subjected to a sinusoidal distributed load, as described by Pagano
 (1969). The resulting transverse shear and axial stresses through the thickness
 of the plate are compared to two existing analytical solutions by Pagano
 (1969). The first solution is derived from classical laminated plate theory
 ( CPT ), while the second is an exact solution
 from linear elasticity theory. 
 This page discusses: Problem description Failure measures Results and discussion Input files References Figures 
 Products Abaqus/Standard Abaqus/Explicit 
 Problem description 
 A schematic of the model is shown in 
 Figure 1 .
 The structure is a composite plate composed of orthotropic layers of equal
 thickness. It is simply supported at its ends and bounded along its edges to
 impose plane strain conditions in the y -direction. Each
 layer models a fiber/matrix composite with the following properties: 
 E L 
 172.4 GPa (25 × 10 6 
 lb/in 2 ) 
 E T 
 6.90 GPa (1.0 × 10 6 
 lb/in 2 ) 
 G L ⁢ T 
 3.45 GPa (0.5 × 10 6 
 lb/in 2 ) 
 G T ⁢ T 
 1.38 GPa (0.2 × 10 6 
 lb/in 2 ) 
 ν L ⁢ T = ν T ⁢ T 
 0.25 
 where L signifies the direction parallel to the fibers
 and T signifies the transverse direction. In 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 two methods are used to specify the lay-up definition for the conventional
 shell element model. First, a composite shell section is defined to specify the
 thickness, number of integration points, material name, and orientation of each
 layer. Second, a composite general shell section is defined to specify the
 thickness, material name, and angle of orientation relative to the section
 orientation (the default shell directions in this case) for each layer. In 
 Abaqus/Explicit 
 only the former method is used. The material properties are specified using the
 orthotropic elastic in plane stress definition. The orientation of the fibers
 in each layer is defined by an in-plane rotation angle measured relative to the
 local shell directions or relative to an orientation definition given for the
 general shell section. 
 In addition to the methods outlined above, a third method of stacking
 continuum shell elements is used to specify the lay-up definition for a
 composite model. This method can be used effectively to study localized
 behavior, since continuum shell elements handle high aspect ratios between the
 in-plane dimension and the thickness dimension well. 
 The lay-up definition for the continuum (solid) element model in 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 is specified using a composite solid section definition. The thickness,
 material name, and orientation definition are specified for each layer. 
 A distributed load with a sinusoidal distribution in space,
 p = p 0 ⁢ sin ⁡ ( π ⁢ x / l ) ,
 is applied to the top of the composite plate. In 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 the load is applied using user subroutine 
 DLOAD in a static linear analysis step. In addition, an 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 input file is included that demonstrates the use of the DCOUP3D element to apply this distributed load. In 
 Abaqus/Explicit 
 the load is applied instantaneously at time t = ​ 
 0. 
 Two composite plates are analyzed in this example. The first is a two-layer
 plate with the fibers oriented parallel and orthogonal to the
 x -axis in the bottom and top layer, respectively. In the
 second plate, which has three layers of equal thickness, the fibers in the
 outer layers are oriented parallel to the x -axis, while
 the fibers in the middle layer are orthogonal to the
 x -axis. The span-to-thickness ratio of the plates,
 s = l / h ,
 is varied from 4 to 30 in the 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 analysis; in 
 Abaqus/Explicit 
 this ratio is 4 throughout the analysis. 
 A 1 × 10 mesh of second-order S8R shell elements is used to model the plates in 
 Abaqus/Standard .
 A 2 × 10 mesh of first-order S4R shell elements is used to model the plates in 
 Abaqus/Explicit .
 The S4R , S8R , and S8RT shell elements are well-suited for modeling thick composite
 shells since they account for transverse shear flexibility. Five integration
 points are specified through the thickness of each layer with the models that
 use the shell section. This provides sufficient data to describe the stress
 distributions through the thickness of each layer. For the models that use the
 general shell section, only three points are available for output. (Since the
 analysis is linear elastic, three points are sufficient to determine all fields
 through the thickness.) The plate with the lowest span-to-thickness ratio is
 also analyzed with 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 using a 1 × 10 mesh of second-order C3D20R composite solid elements. 
 To illustrate the stacking capability of continuum shell elements, several
 meshes are provided for the two- and three-layer plates with a
 span-to-thickness ratio of 4. The two-layer plate is modeled with a 2 × 10 mesh
 of SC8R elements, each element representing a single layer of the 90/0
 composite plate. One model of the three-layer plate uses a 1 × 10 mesh of SC8R elements using a single element through the thickness with a
 composite section definition. Another model of the three-layer plate uses a 3 ×
 10 mesh of SC8R elements, each element representing a single layer of the 0/90/0
 composite plate. Additional models of the three-layer plate with 6, 12, and 24
 elements through the thickness are provided. In these models each composite
 layer is modeled with 2, 4, and 8 elements through the thickness, respectively.
 Additional input files using SC8R elements are included to illustrate defining the stacking and
 thickness direction independent of the element nodal connectivity. 
 Failure measures 
 The plane stress orthotropic failure measures are defined in 
 Plane Stress Orthotropic Failure Measures .
 To demonstrate their use, let the limit stresses and limit strains be given as
 follows: 
 Stress Values: 
 X t 
 X c 
 Y t 
 Y c 
 S 
 (GPa) 
 2.07 × 10 −4 
 −8.28 × 10 −5 
 3.45 × 10 −6 
 −1.03 × 10 −5 
 6.89 × 10 −6 
 (lb/in 2 ) 
 30.0 
 −12.0 
 0.5 
 −1.5 
 1.0 
 Strain Values: 
 X ϵ t 
 X ϵ c 
 Y ϵ t 
 Y ϵ c 
 S ϵ 
 17. × 10 −2 
 −7. × 10 −2 
 5. × 10 −2 
 −1.3 × 10 −2 
 11. × 10 −2 
 The scaling factor for the Tsai-Wu coefficient F 12 
 is f * = ​ 
 0.0. These values are chosen such that failure occurs under the stress-based
 failure criteria for the given loading in the two-layer case with
 s = ​ 
 4. 
 Results and discussion 
 The results for each of the analyses are discussed in the following
 sections. 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 results 
 Figure 2 
 shows the maximum z -displacement as a function of the
 span-to-thickness ratio of the two- and three-layer plates in a normalized form
 as 
 w = 100 ⁢ E T ⁢ h 3 ⁢ u z ⁢ ( l / 2 ) l 4 . 
 As seen in the figure, the finite element displacements for both the two-
 and three-layer plates agree well with the prediction from elasticity theory
 for a wide range of s values. The
 CPT results are stiff at low values of
 s since shear flexibility is neglected. 
 For s = ​ 
 4, 
 Figure 3 
 and 
 Figure 4 
 show the transverse shear stress ( TSHR13 ) and the axial stress ( S11 ) distributions through the plate thickness for the two-layer
 plate normalized as 
 τ ¯ x ⁢ z = τ x ⁢ z ⁢ ( 0 , z ) p o 
 and 
 σ ¯ x = σ x ⁢ ( l / 2 , z ) p o . 
 Figure 5 
 and 
 Figure 6 
 show the corresponding results for the three-layer plate. It is seen that the
 shell element results are much closer to the predictions of
 CPT than to elasticity theory because of the
 assumption of linear stress variation through the thickness in the first-order
 shear flexible theory used for elements such as S8R and S4R . 
 Figure 7 
 compares the elasticity solution of the transverse shear distribution for the
 three-layer plate to an approximate solution using the output variable SSAVG4 . SSAVG4 is the average transverse shear stress in the local
 1-direction. Since SSAVG4 is constant over an element, mesh refinement (in this case 24
 continuum shell elements through the thickness) is typically required to
 capture the variation of shear stress through the thickness of the plate. 
 The output variables CTSHR13 and CTSHR23 offer a more economical alternative to SSAVG4 and SSAVG5 for estimating shear stress in stacked continuum shells. 
 Figure 8 
 and 
 Figure 9 
 show very good agreement between the elasticity solution of the transverse
 shear distribution for the three- and two-layer plates to the solution using
 the output variable CTSHR13 for a 3 × 10 and 2 × 10 mesh of continuum shell elements,
 respectively. The shear stress computed using CTSHR13 is continuous across the continuum shell element interfaces. In
 addition, while the estimates of the transverse shear distributions using SSAVG4 and CTSHR13 (shown in 
 Figure 7 
 and 
 Figure 8 )
 are both good, using CTSHR13 requires a mesh of only 3 continuum shell elements through the
 thickness, as compared to 24 elements for SSAVG4 . 
 Figure 10 
 compares the transverse shear stress distribution obtained with the solid
 element model with the shell element result. The figure shows that the
 transverse shear stresses predicted by solid elements do not vanish at the free
 surfaces of the structure. It also shows that the stress is discontinuous at
 layer interfaces. The reason for this is that in the composite solid element,
 the transverse shear stresses are obtained directly from the displacement field
 in contrast to the shell element, where the transverse shear stresses are
 obtained from an equilibrium calculation. These deficiencies decrease if the
 number of solid elements used in the discretization through the section
 thickness is increased. Although the transverse shear stresses are inaccurate,
 the displacement field and components of stress in the plane of the layer (not
 shown here) are in much better agreement with the analytical result. In fact,
 these results are somewhat better than the results obtained with the S8R elements. The composite solid elements were not used to analyze
 the thinner plates since the solid elements would not have any advantage over
 plate elements in that case. 
 For s = ​ 
 10, 
 Figure 11 
 and 
 Figure 12 
 show that the transverse shear and axial stress distributions of the finite
 element results—along with the CPT 
 predictions—agree with elasticity theory. The stress distributions become more
 accurate with increasing span-to-thickness ratio (as the plate becomes thinner
 in comparison to the span). 
 In 
 Figure 13 
 and 
 Figure 14 
 the maximum stress theory and Tsai-Wu theory failure indices are plotted as a
 function of the normalized distance from the midsurface for the two- and
 three-layer cases, respectively. The indices are calculated at the center of
 the plate for S8R elements with s = ​ 
 4. Values of the failure index greater than or equal to 1.0 indicate failure.
 Discontinuous jumps in the failure index occur at layer boundaries as a result
 of the orientation of the material. The strain levels are well below those
 required for failure, so no strain-based failure indices are plotted. 
 Abaqus/Explicit 
 results 
 The explicit dynamic analysis is run for a sufficiently long time so that a
 quasi-static state is reached—that is, the plates are in steady-state
 vibration. Since step loadings are applied, static solutions of stresses can be
 obtained as half of their vibration amplitudes. 
 Figure 15 
 and 
 Figure 16 
 show the transverse shear stress ( TSHR13 ) and the axial stress ( S11 ) distributions through the plate thickness for the two-layer S4R model normalized as: 
 τ ¯ x ⁢ z = τ x ⁢ z ⁢ ( 0 , z ) p o 
 and 
 σ ¯ x = σ x ⁢ ( l / 2 , z ) p o , 
 compared with classical plate theory ( CPT )
 and linear elasticity theory. 
 Figure 17 
 and 
 Figure 18 
 show the corresponding results for the three-layer plate. In 
 Figure 19 
 and 
 Figure 20 ,
 the maximum stress theory and Tsai-Wu theory failure indices are plotted as a
 function of the normalized distance from the midsurface for the two- and
 three-layer cases, respectively. The indices are calculated at the center of
 the plate. Values of the failure index greater than or equal to 1.0 indicate
 failure. Discontinuous jumps in the failure index occur at layer boundaries due
 to the orientation of the material. The strain levels are well below those
 required for failure, so no strain-based failure indices are plotted. 
 Input files 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 input files 
 compositeshells_s8r.inp 
 Three-layer plate with s = ​ 
 4 using S8R elements. 
 compositeshells_s8r.f 
 User subroutine defining nonuniform distributed load for use with
 compositeshells_s8r.inp. 
 compositeshells_s8r_gensect.inp 
 Three-layer plate with s = ​ 
 4 using S8R elements and 
 SHELL GENERAL SECTION . 
 compositeshells_s8r_gensect.f 
 User subroutine 
 DLOAD used in compositeshells_s8r_gensect.inp. 
 compositeshells_s4.inp 
 S4 element model. 
 compositeshells_s4.f 
 User subroutine 
 DLOAD used in compositeshells_s4.inp. 
 compositeshells_s4_gensect.inp 
 S4 element model with 
 SHELL GENERAL SECTION . 
 compositeshells_s4_gensect.f 
 User subroutine 
 DLOAD used in compositeshells_s4_gensect.inp. 
 compositeshells_s4_dcoup3d.inp 
 S4 element model loaded using a DCOUP3D element. 
 compositeshells_s4r.inp 
 S4R element model. 
 compositeshells_s4r.f 
 User subroutine 
 DLOAD used in compositeshells_s4r.inp. 
 compositeshells_s4r_gensect.inp 
 S4R element model with 
 SHELL GENERAL SECTION . 
 compositeshells_s4r_gensect.f 
 User subroutine 
 DLOAD used in compositeshells_s4r_gensect.inp. 
 compositeshells_c3d20r.inp 
 C3D20R composite solid element model. 
 compositeshells_c3d20r.f 
 User subroutine 
 DLOAD used in compositeshells_c3d20r.inp. 
 compositeshells_sc8r_stackdir_1.inp 
 SC8R model using STACK DIRECTION = 1 . 
 compositeshells_sc8r_stackdir_2.inp 
 SC8R model using STACK DIRECTION = 2 . 
 compositeshells_sc8r_stackdir_3.inp 
 SC8R model using STACK DIRECTION = 3 . 
 compositeshells_sc8r_gensect.inp 
 SC8R model using 
 SHELL GENERAL SECTION . 
 compshell2_std_sc8r_stack_2.inp 
 Two-layer plate with SC8R elements, two elements stacked through the thickness. 
 compshell3_std_sc8r_stack_1.inp 
 Three-layer plate with SC8R elements, single element through the thickness. 
 compshell3_std_sc8r_stack_3.inp 
 Three-layer plate with SC8R elements, three elements stacked through the thickness. 
 compshell3gs_std_sc8r_stack_3.inp 
 Three-layer plate with SC8R elements, three elements stacked through the thickness using a
 general shell section definition. 
 compshell3_std_sc8r_stack_6.inp 
 Three-layer plate with SC8R elements, six elements stacked through the thickness. 
 compshell3_std_sc8r_stack_12.inp 
 Three-layer plate with SC8R elements, 12 elements stacked through the thickness. 
 compshell3_std_sc8r_stack_24.inp 
 Three-layer plate with SC8R elements, 24 elements stacked through the thickness. 
 compositeshells_sc8r.f 
 User subroutine 
 DLOAD used with the SC8R models. 
 Abaqus/Explicit 
 input files 
 compshell3_1.inp 
 Three-layer plate modeled with S4R elements. 
 compshell3_1_sc8r.inp 
 Three-layer plate modeled with SC8R elements. 
 compshell3_1_sc8r_stackdir_1.inp 
 Three-layer plate modeled with SC8R elements using STACK DIRECTION = 1 . 
 compshell3_1_sc8r_stackdir_2.inp 
 Three-layer plate modeled with SC8R elements using STACK DIRECTION = 2 . 
 compshell3_1_sc8r_stackdir_3.inp 
 Three-layer plate modeled with SC8R elements using STACK DIRECTION = 3 . 
 compshell3_2.inp 
 Three-layer plate with a different thickness and modeled with S4R elements. 
 compshell2_1.inp 
 Two-layer plate modeled with S4R elements. 
 compshell2_2.inp 
 Two-layer plate modeled with S4R elements. 
 compshell2_1_sc8r.inp 
 Two-layer plate modeled with SC8R elements. 
 References 
 Pagano ,    N .   J . ,  “ Exact
Solutions for Composite Laminates in Cylindrical
Bending ,” Journal of Composite
Materials , vol.  3 , pp.  398 – 411 , 1969 . 
 Figures 
 Figure 1. Composite plate subject to distributed loading. 
 Figure 2. Maximum deflection of two- and three-layer plates with various
 span-to-thickness ratios; 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 analysis. 
 Figure 3. Transverse shear stress distribution through the thickness of a
 two-layer plate ( s = ​ 4);
 Abaqus/Standard 
 analysis. 
 Figure 4. Axial stress distribution through the thickness of a two-layer plate
 ( s = ​ 4);
 Abaqus/Standard 
 analysis. 
 Figure 5. Transverse shear stress distribution through the thickness of a
 three-layer plate ( s = ​ 4);
 Abaqus/Standard 
 analysis. 
 Figure 6. Axial stress distribution through the thickness of a three-layer plate
 ( s = ​ 4);
 Abaqus/Standard 
 analysis. 
 Figure 7. Comparison of the elasticity solution of the transverse shear stress
 distribution in a three-layer plate to the output variable SSAVG4 with 24 SC8R elements stacked through the thickness; 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 analysis. 
 Figure 8. Comparison of the elasticity solution of the transverse shear stress
 distribution in a three-layer plate to the output variable CTSHR13 with 3 SC8R elements stacked through the thickness; 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 analysis. 
 Figure 9. Comparison of the elasticity solution of the transverse shear stress
 distribution in a two-layer plate to the output variable CTSHR13 with 2 SC8R elements stacked through the thickness; 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 analysis. 
 Figure 10. Transverse shear stress distribution through the thickness of a
 three-layer plate ( s = ​ 4):
 shells versus solid elements; 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 analysis. 
 Figure 11. Transverse shear stress distribution through the thickness of a
 three-layer plate ( s = ​ 10);
 Abaqus/Standard 
 analysis. 
 Figure 12. Axial stress distribution through the thickness of a three-layer plate
 ( s = ​ 10);
 Abaqus/Standard 
 analysis. 
 Figure 13. Maximum stress theory and Tsai-Wu theory ( F 12 = ​ 0.0)
 failure indices as a function of normalized distance from the midsurface.
 Two-layer plate, s = ​ 4;
 Abaqus/Standard 
 analysis. 
 Figure 14. Maximum stress theory and Tsai-Wu theory ( F 12 = ​ 0.0)
 failure indices as a function of normalized distance from the midsurface.
 Three-layer plate, s = ​ 4;
 Abaqus/Standard 
 analysis. 
 Figure 15. Transverse shear stress distribution through the thickness of a
 two-layer plate; 
 Abaqus/Explicit 
 analysis. 
 Figure 16. Axial stress distribution through the thickness of a two-layer plate; 
 Abaqus/Explicit 
 analysis. 
 Figure 17. Transverse shear stress distribution through the thickness of a
 three-layer plate; 
 Abaqus/Explicit 
 analysis. 
 Figure 18. Axial stress distribution through the thickness of a three-layer
 plate; 
 Abaqus/Explicit 
 analysis. 
 Figure 19. Maximum stress theory and Tsai-Wu theory failure indices as a function
 of normalized distance from the midsurface. Two-layer plate; 
 Abaqus/Explicit 
 analysis. 
 Figure 20. Maximum stress theory and Tsai-Wu theory failure indices as a function
 of normalized distance from the midsurface. Three-layer plate; 
 Abaqus/Explicit 
 analysis.