Two-point bending of a pipe due to self weight: CAXA and SAXA elements 
 Two-point bending of a pipe due to self weight: CAXA and SAXA elements This example verifies the two-point bending of a pipe due to self weight for CAXA and SAXA elements. 
 This page discusses: Problem description Reference solution Results and discussion Input files Figures 
 Products Abaqus/Standard 
 Problem description 
 The material is linear elastic with a Young's modulus of 207 GPa, a Poisson's ratio of 0.3, and a weight density of 0.15 MN/m 3 . u z = 0 on the z = 0 plane; u r = 0 at point B . A gravity force is considered to be acting in the positive x -direction. 
 CAXA mesh 
 In the analyses that test the CAXA elements, only the symmetric half of the structure is considered. The models using full-integration and reduced-integration second-order elements employ one element through the thickness and seven elements along the pipe, with two equal-sized elements along C ⁢ B and five equal-sized elements along B ⁢ A . The models using the lower-order fully integrated elements employ twice as many elements in both the radial and axial directions. The models using the lower-order reduced-integration elements employ four times as many elements in both the radial and axial directions. 
 SAXA mesh 
 In the analyses that test the SAXA elements, only the symmetric half of the structure is considered. Second-order element models use seven elements along the pipe, with two equal-sized elements along C ⁢ B and five equal-sized elements along B ⁢ A . First-order element models use 14 elements along the pipe, with four equal-sized elements along C ⁢ B and 10 equal-sized elements along B ⁢ A . 
 Reference solution 
 This problem provides a test on the body force type BX for the axisymmetric solid elements with nonlinear, asymmetric deformation. The reference solution is obtained from the analysis of an equivalent three-dimensional model using the 20-node brick element C3D20 . The three-dimensional mesh employs one element in the radial direction, six elements in the circumferential direction, and seven elements along the pipe. The input file for the reference solution is eref3ksg.inp . 
 Results and discussion 
 The solutions are linear, small-displacement solutions and are in good agreement with the reference solution. 
 Input files 
 ecnssfsg.inp 
 CAXA41 elements. ecnssrsg.inp 
 CAXA4R1 elements. ecnsshsg.inp 
 CAXA4H1 elements. ecnssysg.inp 
 CAXA4RH1 elements. ecntsfsg.inp 
 CAXA42 elements. ecntsrsg.inp 
 CAXA4R2 elements. ecntshsg.inp 
 CAXA4H2 elements. ecntsysg.inp 
 CAXA4RH2 elements. ecnusfsg.inp 
 CAXA43 elements. ecnusrsg.inp 
 CAXA4R3 elements. ecnushsg.inp 
 CAXA4H3 elements. ecnusysg.inp 
 CAXA4RH3 elements. ecnvsfsg.inp 
 CAXA44 elements. ecnvsrsg.inp 
 CAXA4R4 elements. ecnvshsg.inp 
 CAXA4H4 elements. ecnvsysg.inp 
 CAXA4RH4 elements. ecnwsfsg.inp 
 CAXA81 elements. ecnwsrsg.inp 
 CAXA8R1 elements. ecnwshsg.inp 
 CAXA8H1 elements. ecnwsysg.inp 
 CAXA8RH1 elements. ecnxsfsg.inp 
 CAXA82 elements. ecnxsrsg.inp 
 CAXA8R2 elements. ecnxshsg.inp 
 CAXA8H2 elements. ecnxsysg.inp 
 CAXA8RH2 elements. ecnysfsg.inp 
 CAXA83 elements. ecnyshsg.inp 
 CAXA8H3 elements. ecnwpfsg.inp 
 CAXA8P1 elements. ecnwprsg.inp 
 CAXA8RP1 elements. ecnxpfsg.inp 
 CAXA8P2 elements. ecnxprsg.inp 
 CAXA8RP2 elements. ecnypfsg.inp 
 CAXA8P3 elements. ecnyprsg.inp 
 CAXA8RP3 elements. esnssxsg.inp 
 SAXA11 elements. esntsxsg.inp 
 SAXA12 elements. esnusxsg.inp 
 SAXA13 elements. esnvsxsg.inp 
 SAXA14 elements. esnwsxsg.inp 
 SAXA21 elements. esnxsxsg.inp 
 SAXA22 elements. esnysxsg.inp 
 SAXA23 elements. esnzsxsg.inp 
 SAXA24 elements. 
 Figures 
 Figure 1. Two-point bending of a pipe.