Uniaxial stretching of an elastic sheet with a circular hole 
 Uniaxial stretching of an elastic sheet with a circular
 hole This example demonstrates the use and verifies the results of
 hyperelastic and viscoelastic materials in plane stress. 
 This example considers the uniform large stretching of a thin,
 initially square sheet containing a centrally located circular hole. Plane
 stress conditions are assumed, and the results are compared with those provided
 in Oden (1972) for four different forms of the strain energy function using the
 experimental results of Treloar (1944). 
 This page discusses: Problem description Loading and controls Results and discussion Input files References Figures 
 Products Abaqus/Standard 
 Problem description 
 The geometry and the mesh for a quarter-sheet are shown in 
 Figure 1 .
 The undeformed square sheet is 2 mm (0.079 in) thick and is 165 mm (6.5 in) on
 each side. It has a centrally located internal hole of radius 6.35 mm (0.25
 in). The body is modeled with 32 second-order plane stress reduced-integration
 elements (element type CPS8R ). The incompressibility of the material requires the use of the
 “hybrid” elements for plane strain, axisymmetric, or three-dimensional cases;
 but in plane stress the thickness change is available as a free variable that
 can be used to enforce the constraint of constant volume (incompressibility),
 so this standard displacement formulation element ( CPS8R ) is appropriate. No mesh convergence studies have been performed,
 but the good agreement with the results given by Oden (1972) suggests that the
 model chosen has comparable accuracy with the model used by Oden.
 Four different material models are used. The experimental data of Treloar
 (1944) composed of uniaxial, biaxial, and planar tension data are applied to
 these models. Two of the four models are forms of the standard polynomial
 hyperelasticity model in 
 Abaqus .
 One is the classical Mooney-Rivlin strain energy function: 
 U = C 10 ⁢ ( I 1 - 3 ) + C 01 ⁢ ( I 2 - 3 ) . The other is due to Biderman: 
 U = C 10 ⁢ ( I 1 - 3 ) + C 01 ⁢ ( I 2 - 3 ) + C 20 ⁢ ( I 1 - 3 ) 2 + C 30 ⁢ ( I 1 - 3 ) 3 . In both cases the material is assumed to be incompressible. The constants
 used by Oden (1972) are C 10 =
 0.1863 MPa (27.02 psi); C 01 =
 0.00979 MPa (1.42 psi); and, for the Biderman model, C 20 =
 −0.00186 MPa (−0.27 psi), and C 30 =
 0.0000451 MPa (0.00654 psi), with all other C I ⁢ J =
 0. For the Mooney-Rivlin material N = 1 
 is specified in the hyperelastic material definition ( Hyperelastic Behavior of Rubberlike Materials ),
 and only C 10 
 and C 01 
 are given. For the Biderman material N = 3 , 
 and nine constants must be given. Since the material is incompressible the
 constants D i 
 are set to zero.
 The third material model is the Ogden hyperelasticity model in 
 Abaqus :
 U = ∑ N i = 1 2 ⁢ μ i α i 2 ⁢ ( λ ¯ 1 α i + λ ¯ 2 α i + λ ¯ 3 α i - 3 ) + ∑ i = 1 N 1 D i ⁢ ( J e ⁢ l - 1 ) 2 ⁢ i . The Ogden hyperelastic parameters are obtained using test data in the
 hyperelastic material definition to fit the experimental data of Treloar. Three
 pairs of parameters μ i 
 and α i 
 are derived for N = 3 .
 The fourth material model is the Marlow hyperelasticity model in 
 Abaqus .
 In this model the deviatoric part of the response is derived from one set of
 test data (uniaxial, biaxial, or planar) such that the material's behavior is
 represented exactly in the deformation mode for which test data are available.
 Three examples are provided in which the model is based on uniaxial, biaxial,
 or planar test data, respectively.
 In addition, the Biderman model and the Marlow model are used in conjunction
 with the viscoelastic material model. The shear relaxation is defined by
 time-dependent moduli expanded in a Prony series with two terms: 
 G R ⁢ ( t ) / G 0 = 1 - ∑ i = 1 2 g ¯ i P ⁢ ( 1 - e - t / τ i ) , with g ¯ 1 P =
 0.25, τ 1 =
 5.0 sec and g ¯ 2 P =
 0.25, τ 2 =
 10 sec. The bulk behavior is assumed to remain incompressible. 
 Loading and controls 
 The sheet is stretched to a width of 1181 mm (46.5 in)—over seven times its
 initial width—in the x -direction, while the edges parallel
 to the x -axis are restrained from stretching in the
 y -direction. The y -direction
 restraints are imposed directly with a boundary condition. The stretch in the
 x -direction is prescribed by imposing uniform normal
 displacement on the right-hand edge of the mesh. All the nodes on that edge are
 constrained to have the same x -displacement by using an
 equation constraint. The displacement of the retained node (node 1601) is then
 prescribed to stretch the sheet. This technique allows the total stretching
 force to be obtained directly as the reaction force at this node. The symmetry
 conditions at x = 0 
 and at y = 0 
 are also imposed with a boundary condition.
 An initial increment of 5% of the final displacement is suggested. The size
 of subsequent increments is chosen by the automatic incrementation scheme.
 In the viscoelastic case a second step is added, driven by the quasi-static
 procedure. The deformation is kept the same, and the stresses relax. The time
 period is 100 sec, which is much larger than the time constants of the
 material. As a result, the long-term behavior of the material should be
 obtained. Setting t = ∞ 
 in the expression for the time-dependent moduli provides
 G R ⁢ ( ∞ ) = 0.5 ⁢ G 0 
 and K R ⁢ ( ∞ ) = K 0 . 
 Since the deformation is almost completely constrained during the relaxation
 step, we expect the stresses to be halved in this process. The maximum
 difference in the creep strain increment over a time increment is specified
 using a value of 0.1, which enables automatic incrementation. This value
 controls the error in the integration of the viscoelastic model by limiting the
 difference in the strain increments defined by forward Euler and backward Euler
 integrations. The value of 10% strain error per increment used here is very
 large and suggests that no attempt is being made to limit this source of error:
 rather, we are allowing the automatic time incrementation to reach the
 long-term (steady-state) solution as quickly as possible.
 Results and discussion 
 The final displaced configuration for the case with the Biderman material
 model is shown in 
 Figure 2 ;
 and the load responses are shown in 
 Figure 3 ,
 where the load is plotted as a function of the overall nominal strain of the
 sheet in the x -direction. The results of the first three
 hyperelastic models are seen to agree quite closely with Oden's. The results of
 the Marlow hyperelastic model also agree well with Oden's, although they are
 not shown in 
 Figure 3 .
 The Mooney-Rivlin strain energy function (with C 10 
 and C 01 
 as the only nonzero terms) cannot predict the “locking” of the response at
 higher strains that is predicted by the Biderman and Ogden strain energy
 functions. 
 Figure 4 
 shows the load-time response for the case including the viscoelastic relaxation
 step.
 Input files 
 CPS8R elements: elasticsheet_cps8r_biderman.inp Biderman material model. The Mooney-Rivlin model is obtained by modifying
 the 
 HYPERELASTIC option to give N = 1 
 and providing only the first two constants on the data line.
 elasticsheet_cps8r_ogdendata.inp Ogden hyperelasticity formulation with the TEST DATA INPUT option.
 elasticsheet_cps8r_bidervisco.inp Viscoelastic Biderman material model including the relaxation step.
 elasticsheet_bidervisco_stabil.inp Viscoelastic Biderman material model including the relaxation step and
 automatic stabilization.
 elasticsheet_bidervisco_stabil_adap.inp Viscoelastic Biderman material model including the relaxation step and
 adaptive automatic stabilization.
 elasticsheet_postoutput.inp Data used to postprocess the results file from
 elasticsheet_cps8r_biderman.inp.
 elasticsheet_cps8r_marlowu.inp Marlow material model using uniaxial test data.
 elasticsheet_cps8r_marlowb.inp Marlow material model using biaxial test data.
 elasticsheet_cps8r_marlowp.inp Marlow material model using planar test data.
 elasticsheet_cps8r_marlowuvisco.inp Viscoelastic Marlow material model using uniaxial test data and including
 the relaxation step.
 elasticsheet_cps8r_marlowbvisco.inp Viscoelastic Marlow material model using biaxial test data and including the
 relaxation step.
 elasticsheet_cps8r_marlowpvisco.inp Viscoelastic Marlow material model using planar test data and including the
 relaxation step.
 CPS4 elements: elasticsheet_cps4_biderman.inp Biderman material model. 
 elasticsheet_cps4_ogdendata.inp Ogden hyperelasticity formulation with the TEST DATA INPUT option.
 elasticsheet_cps4_bidervisco.inp Viscoelastic Biderman material model including the relaxation step.
 elasticsheet_cps4_marlowu.inp Marlow material model using uniaxial test data.
 elasticsheet_cps4_marlowuvisco.inp Viscoelastic Marlow material model using uniaxial test data and including
 the relaxation step.
 References 
 Oden, J. T.,
 Finite Elements
of Nonlinear Continua, McGraw-Hill, New
York, 1972. Treloar, L. R. G., “ Stress-Strain Data for Vulcanised Rubber
Under Various Types of Deformation, ” 
Trans. Faraday Soc., 40, pp. 59–70,
1944. 
 Figures 
 Figure 1. Rubber sheet and mesh. Figure 2. Final displaced configuration, Biderman model. Figure 3. Applied force versus overall nominal strain. Figure 4. Load versus time, Biderman model, with a relaxation period of 100
 secs.