Element-Based Surface Definition 
 Element-Based Surface Definition 
 An element-based surface: 
 can be defined on solid, structural, rigid, surface, gasket, or
 acoustic elements; 
 can be deformable or rigid; 
 can be defined on any combination of elements in many cases; 
 can be defined on the exterior of any body; and 
 can be defined on the interior of any body that is modeled with
 continuum, shell, membrane, surface, beam, pipe, truss, or rigid elements
 (e.g., to define a cross-section through a body) either by simply cutting the
 body with a plane or by identifying the elements and the corresponding interior
 facets. 
 For details about defining node-based surfaces, see 
 Node-Based Surface Definition .
 For details about defining analytical rigid surfaces, see 
 Analytical Rigid Surface Definition .
 For details about defining surfaces using Boolean combinations of existing
 surfaces, see 
 Operating on Surfaces .
 This page discusses: Defining Element-Based Surfaces General Restrictions on Element-Based Surfaces Surface Discretization Creating Surfaces on Solid, Continuum Shell, and Cohesive Elements Creating Surfaces on Structural, Surface, and Rigid Elements Creating Surfaces on Gasket Elements Creating Interior Cross-Section Surfaces Whole-Model Free Surface in an Abaqus/Explicit Input File Trimming the Perimeter of an Open Surface 
 See Also About Surfaces Integrated Output Section Definition In Other Guides Distributed Loads Prescribed Assembly Loads Mesh Tie Constraints Coupling Constraints Shell-to-Solid Coupling About Contact Interactions Cavity Radiation in Abaqus/Standard *SURFACE What is a surface? 
 Products Abaqus/Standard Abaqus/Explicit Abaqus/CAE 
 Defining Element-Based Surfaces 
 You must assign a name to all element-based surfaces; this name can be used
 with various features to define a contact model, a surface-based load, or a
 surface-based constraint. In addition, you must specify the region of your
 model on which the surface is defined. In an input file you can define
 element-based surfaces on element faces, edges, or ends. 
 In 
 Abaqus/CAE 
 you can define element-based surfaces on geometric or element faces, edges, or
 ends. 
 The methods for defining surfaces depend on the underlying element type
 and are discussed later in this section. 
 In an input file you need only specify an element number or element set name
 and all exposed element faces of these elements (or “contact edges” of beam,
 pipe, and truss elements) will be included in the surface. Optionally (and the only available method in 
 Abaqus/CAE ) ,
 you can specify individual faces, edges, or ends, which allows you direct
 control over which faces, edges, or ends are to be included in the surface. 
 For general contact in 
 Abaqus/Explicit 
 the surface perimeter edges are generated automatically from the surface facets
 for use in edge-to-edge contact constraints; you can specify that geometric
 feature edges should be included as well (see 
 About General Contact in Abaqus/Explicit 
 and 
 Assigning Surface Properties for General Contact in Abaqus/Explicit 
 for more information). 
 Input File Usage SURFACE , NAME = surface_name , TYPE = ELEMENT (default) An element number or element set name is specified as the
first entry of each data line. Optionally, an element face, edge, or end
identifier can be specified as the second entry on a data line. The face and
edge identifiers used in 
 Abaqus 
are discussed later in this section. Multiple data lines can be
used to define a surface. For example, SURF_1 
can be specified by the following input: SURFACE , NAME =SURF_1, TYPE = ELEMENT 
ELSET_1,
ELSET_2, S2 Abaqus/CAE Usage Any module except Sketch, Job, and Visualization: Tools Surface Create : Name: surface_name 
 General Restrictions on Element-Based Surfaces 
 Elements defining a single surface must satisfy the following rules,
 regardless of how the surface is used in 
 Abaqus :
 Two-dimensional, axisymmetric, and three-dimensional elements cannot be
 mixed in the same surface definition. 
 In 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 deformable elements cannot be combined with rigid elements to define a single
 surface, but can be combined with other deformable elements that are part of a
 rigid body (see 
 Rigid Body Definition ).
 The following element types cannot be mixed with other element types in
 the same surface definition: 
 Coupled thermal-electrical-structural elements 
 Coupled temperature-displacement elements 
 Heat transfer elements 
 Pore pressure elements 
 Coupled thermal-electrical elements 
 Acoustic finite or infinite elements 
 The axisymmetric solid Fourier elements with nonlinear, asymmetric
 deformation ( CAXA elements) cannot form element-based surfaces. 
 The face identifier label is required to import an element-based surface from an input
 file. 
 Surface Discretization 
 For element-based surfaces 
 Abaqus 
 uses a faceted geometry defined by the finite element mesh as the surface
 definition. The surface in a coarse finite element model may not be a very good
 approximation for contact modeling if the physical surface is curved.
 Therefore, sufficient mesh refinement must be used to ensure that the faceted
 surface is a reasonable approximation of the curved physical surface.
 Alternatively, some curved surface geometries may be more effectively modeled
 with analytical rigid surfaces (see 
 Analytical Rigid Surface Definition ).
 Creating Surfaces on Solid, Continuum Shell, and Cohesive Elements 
 There are three ways to define the facets of an element-based surface on
 solid, continuum shell, and cohesive elements: 
 by instructing 
 Abaqus 
 to generate the “free surface” from the exposed faces of elements, 
 by specifying the particular faces for each element, and 
 in 
 Abaqus/Explicit 
 by instructing 
 Abaqus 
 to generate an interior surface from element faces that are not exposed (i.e.,
 not part of the “free surface” of the model). 
 The automatic free surface generation approach is the simplest method of
 defining exterior surfaces on solid elements. Specifying the element faces
 gives you exact control over which element faces (any combination of exterior
 and interior faces) form the surface. Automatic generation of an interior
 surface is the simplest method of defining interior surfaces on solid elements
 (interior surfaces can be useful for modeling surface erosion due to element
 failure). 
 It is possible to use all three approaches in the same surface definition
 when creating a single surface. 
 Generating the Free Surface Automatically 
 You can define the facets of a surface by specifying a series of elements.
 The faces of these elements that are on the exterior (free) surface of the
 model are included in the surface definition. 
 When the free surface generation method is used to define surfaces, the
 specified elements can be a mixture of continuum and structural elements. 
 Multi-point constraints ( General Multi-Point Constraints )
 involving nodes on exposed surfaces are not taken into account during free
 surface generation, which can result in faces that are not on the exterior of a
 body being included in surface definitions. For example, the nodes of the
 elements in element set REFINED shown in 
 Figure 1 
 are used in linear, mesh-refinement constraints. The surfaces generated with
 and without multi-point constraints are shown in 
 Figure 1 .
 Figure 1. Effect of multi-point constraints on automatic surface
 generation. 
 Input File Usage SURFACE , NAME = surface_name , TYPE = ELEMENT 
 element number or element set, For example, if the name of the shaded element set in the
figure below is ESETA , the surface named
 ASURF is specified by SURFACE , NAME =ASURF, TYPE = ELEMENT 
ESETA, 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage 
 The automatic free surface generation method is not supported in 
 Abaqus/CAE . 
 Special Treatment of Cohesive Elements for Automatic Free Surface Generation 
 The definition of exposed faces of elements for the purpose of automatic
 free surface generation has the following unique aspects regarding cohesive
 elements: 
 Faces of non-cohesive elements along an interface of shared nodes with
 cohesive elements are considered exposed. 
 The top and bottom faces of all cohesive elements are considered
 exposed; side faces of cohesive elements are never considered exposed. 
 See 
 Modeling with Cohesive Elements 
 for examples of surfaces on or near cohesive elements. 
 Creating Surface Facets by Specifying Solid, Continuum Shell, and Cohesive Element Faces 
 You can define the facets of a surface by identifying the element faces that
 should be included in the surface definition. 
 Element face numbers are defined in 
 About the Element Library .
 Table 1 
 contains a list of valid face identifiers for all solid, continuum shell, and
 cohesive elements. The face identifier can refer to individual elements or to
 entire element sets. 
 Table 1. Surface definition face identifier labels for solid, continuum shell,
 and cohesive elements. 
 Elements 
 Face Labels 
 DCCAX2(D) 
 SPOS ,
 SNEG 
 CPEG3(H)(T) CPS3(T) CPE3(H)(T) CAX3(H)(T) CGAX3(H) AC2D3 ACAX3 DC2D3(E) DCAX3(E) 
 CPEG6(M)(H)(T) CPS6M(T) CPE6(M)(H)(T) CAX6(M)(H)(T) CGAX6(M)(H)(T) AC2D6 ACAX6 DC2D6(E) DCAX6(E) 
 S1 ,
 S2 , S3 
 CGAX4(R)(H)(T) CPEG4(H)(I)(R)(T) CPS4(I)(R)(T) CPE4(H)(I)(R)(T)(P) CAX4(H)(I)(R)(T)(P) C3D4(H)(T) AC2D4(R) ACAX4(R) AC3D4 DC2D4(E) DCAX4(E) DC3D4(E) DCC2D4(D) COH2D4 
 CGAX8(R)(H) CPEG8(R)(H)(T) CPS8(R)(T) CPE8(H)(R)(T)(P) CAX8(R)(H)(T)(P) C3D10(M)(H)(I)(T) AC2D8 ACAX8 AC3D10 DC2D8(E) DCAX8(E) DC3D10(E) DCCAX4(D) COHAX4 
 S1 ,
 S2 , S3 ,
 S4 
 C3D6(H)(T) AC3D5 AC3D6 C3D5(H) CCL9(H) DC3D5 DC3D6(E) 
 SC6R C3D15(H)(V) AC3D15 CCL18(H) DC3D15(E) COH3D6 
 S1 ,
 S2 , S3 ,
 S4 , S5 
 C3D8(H)(I)(R)(T)(P) C3D27(R)(H) AC3D8(R) CCL12(H) DC3D8(R)(E) DCC3D8(D) SC8R 
 C3D20(H)(R)(T)(P) AC3D20 CCL24(R)(H) DC3D20(E) COH3D8 
 S1 ,
 S2 , S3 ,
 S4 , S5 ,
 S6 
 Input File Usage SURFACE , NAME = surface_name , TYPE = ELEMENT 
 element number or set, face identifier When you specify the element faces to define surfaces, the
specified elements cannot be a mixture of continuum and structural elements;
however, each data line of the surface definition can refer to different
element types. 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage Any module except Sketch, Job, and Visualization: Tools Surface Create : Name: surface_name , pick faces in viewport 
 Generating an Interior Surface Automatically 
 Abaqus/Explicit provides two approaches to define eroding surfaces for a solid element mesh for use in
 general contact (see Modeling Surface Erosion ). The recommended approach dynamically evolves the list of
 surface faces to correspond to currently exposed faces of elements that have not failed.
 The other approach statically creates all of the possible interior faces and tracks which
 of these faces are active. These methods give approximately the same results, but the
 dynamically evolving approach often uses much less memory and tends to be faster. 
 Elements that do not have any interior faces by definition (such as shell elements, beam
 elements, pipe elements, and membrane elements) are ignored. 
 Multi-point constraints are not taken into account when generating interior
 surfaces. This can result in faces that are on the interior of a body being
 excluded from the surface definition. 
 Generating a Dynamically Evolving Eroding Surface 
 In this recommended approach the surface evolves to correspond to the currently exposed
 faces of the specified element set. At a given point in the simulation, this surface may
 be a combination of originally exposed faces and faces that were originally in the
 interior. 
 Input File Usage 
 SURFACE , NAME = surface_name , TYPE = ELEMENT 
 element number or element set , ERODING 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage 
 Generating a dynamically evolving eroding surface is not supported in Abaqus/CAE . 
 Generating a Static Interior Surface 
 In this approach all faces of the specified elements that are not on the exterior
 (free) surface of the model are included in the surface definition. Abaqus tracks which of these faces are currently exposed. The automatic generation of an
 interior surface is equivalent to constructing a surface consisting of all faces of the
 elements and then subtracting the free surfaces of those elements. A static interior
 surface is less convenient (because faces on the original exterior must be included
 separately) and less efficient (due to memory allocation for all faces of all elements
 rather than just currently active faces) to use than a dynamically evolving eroding
 surface. 
 Input File Usage 
 SURFACE , NAME = surface_name , TYPE = ELEMENT 
 element number or element set , INTERIOR 
 For example, if the name of the shaded element set in the figure below is
 ESETA , the surface named
 ASURFINTR (the elements in the figure have been
 reduced in size to differentiate faces that share the same nodes) is specified by 
 SURFACE , NAME =ASURFINTR, TYPE = ELEMENT 
ESETA, INTERIOR 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage 
 Any module except Sketch, Job, and Visualization: Tools Surface Create : Name: surface_name , Type : Mesh ; pick element faces or edges from an interior surface 
 You can use the selection tools to select from an interior entity of a model; see
 Selecting interior surfaces . 
 Creating Surfaces on Structural, Surface, and Rigid Elements 
 There are five ways to define surfaces on structural, surface, and rigid
 elements: 
 You can create a single-sided surface with a well-defined orientation by
 indicating either the top or bottom surface of each specified element. 
 You can create a double-sided surface by specifying only the elements
 and letting 
 Abaqus 
 generate the “free surface” from the exposed faces. 
 You can create an edge-based surface. 
 You can create a cross-section surface on the ends of beam, pipe, and
 truss elements. 
 You can create a three-dimensional curve-type surface along the length
 of beam, pipe, and truss elements by specifying only the elements and letting 
 Abaqus 
 generate the “free surface.” 
 It is possible to use any or all of the above approaches in the same surface
 definition as long as it makes sense in the use of that surface with other
 features in 
 Abaqus .
 Table 2 
 contains a list of valid face and edge identifiers for structural, surface, and
 rigid elements. 
 Table 2. Surface definition face and edge identifier labels for structural,
 surface, and rigid elements. 
 Elements 
 Face and Edge Labels 
 SAX1 MAX1 MGAX1 M3D6 M3D9(R) MCL9 DS8 DSAX2 SFMAX2 SFMGAX2 SFM3D4(R) SFM3D8(R) SFMCL6 
 SAX2(T) MAX2 MGAX2 M3D8(R) MCL6 DS4 DSAX1 SFMAX1 SFMGAX1 SFM3D3 SFM3D6 SFMCL9 RAX2 
 SPOS ,
 SNEG 
 B21(H) B23(H) PIPE21(H) T2D2(H)(T) 
 B22(H) ( Abaqus/Standard ) PIPE22(H) T2D3(H)(T) 
 SPOS ,
 SNEG 
 B22 ( Abaqus/Explicit )
 B32(H)(OS) ELBOW31(B)(C) PIPE31(H) T3D2(H)(T)   
 B31(H)(OS) B33(H) ELBOW32 PIPE32(H) T3D3(H)(T) 
 END1, END2;
 must use node-based surfaces with the contact pair algorithm in 
 Abaqus/Explicit .
 STRI3 S3(R)(S) M3D3 
 STRI65 R3D3 
 SPOS ,
 SNEG , E1 ,
 E2 , E3 
 ACIN2D2 ACINAX2 
 ACIN2D3 ACINAX3 
 SPOS E1 ,
 E2 
 S4(R)(S)(W)(5) S9R5 M3D4(R) 
 S8R5(T) R3D4 
 SPOS ,
 SNEG , E1 ,
 E2 , E3 ,
 E4 
 ACIN3D3 
 ACIN3D6 
 SPOS E1 ,
 E2 , E3 
 ACIN3D4 
 ACIN3D8 
 SPOS E1 ,
 E2 , E3 ,
 E4 
 Defining Single-Sided Surfaces 
 You can define a single-sided surface on the positive or negative face of
 structural, surface, or rigid elements. The positive face is defined as the one
 in the direction of the positive element normal, and the negative face is
 defined as the one in the direction opposite to the element normal. The
 definition of the element normal for all elements is given in 
 About the Element Library .
 You must ensure that all of the specified elements have their normals
 oriented consistently. If they are oriented as shown in 
 Figure 2 ,
 the surface normals will reverse direction as the surface is traversed and
 improper results may occur when the surface is used with features requiring an
 orientation such as distributed surface loads. 
 Figure 2. Inconsistent orientation of structural element normals can result in
 an invalid surface. 
 Further, an error message will be issued and the analysis will terminate if
 this condition is detected for surfaces used with mesh tie constraints in 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 or with contact pairs. To correct the surface orientations in this figure, two
 separate element sets with different face identifiers should be used. 
 Input File Usage Use the following option to define a surface on the positive
face of a structural, surface, or rigid element: SURFACE , NAME = surface_name , TYPE = ELEMENT 
 element number or element set , SPOS Use the following option to define a surface on the negative
face of a structural, surface, or rigid element: SURFACE , NAME = surface_name , TYPE = ELEMENT 
 element number or element set , SNEG For example, single-sided surfaces on the positive faces of
the elements in element set SHELL can be defined
using input similar to SURFACE , NAME =BSURF, TYPE = ELEMENT 
SHELL, SPOS Abaqus/CAE Usage Any module except Sketch, Job, and Visualization: Tools Surface Create : Name: surface_name , pick face in viewport, click mouse button 2, and specify the side of the selected face 
 Defining Double-Sided Surfaces 
 You can create double-sided surface facets on three-dimensional shell,
 membrane, surface, and rigid elements using the automatic surface facet
 generation approach (i.e., specifying only the element numbers or sets). Some
 applications that refer to surfaces do not allow the use of double-sided
 surfaces: examples include contact pairs in 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 and features requiring an oriented surface such as distributed surface loads.
 When double-sided surfaces can be used, they are often preferred to
 single-sided surfaces. In some applications, such as when defining the contact
 domain for general contact, it does not matter whether single- or double-sided
 surfaces are used. 
 When double-sided surfaces are used with contact pairs in 
 Abaqus/Explicit ,
 the normals of all the underlying elements do not need to have a consistent
 positive orientation: 
 Abaqus/Explicit 
 will define the contact surface such that its facets have consistent normals,
 even if the underlying elements do not have consistent normals. The facet
 normals will be the same as the element normals if the element normals are all
 consistent; otherwise, an arbitrary positive orientation is chosen for the
 surface. The positive orientation is significant only with respect to the sign
 of the contact pressure output variable for the contact pair algorithm, CPRESS (see 
 Output ).
 Although contact is enforced unconditionally on both sides of a surface when self-contact is used
 with contact pairs, contact is enforced on both sides of a surface used in two-body
 contact only when that surface is double-sided (if allowed). The use of single-sided
 surfaces with contact pairs is sometimes desirable: the resolution of large initial
 overclosures in contact pairs is more robust with single-sided surfaces than with
 double-sided surfaces (see Contact Initialization for Contact Pairs in Abaqus/Explicit ). However,
 single-sided contact is generally more limiting than double-sided contact; it may cause an
 analysis to fail due to excessive element distortion or not enforce the contact conditions
 realistically if a secondary node unexpectedly moves behind a main surface. This condition
 can occur, for example, when large deformations or rigid-body motions are present or due
 to complex tool shapes in a forming analysis. Input File Usage Use the following option to define a double-sided surface on
three-dimensional shell, membrane, surface, or rigid elements in 
 Abaqus/Explicit : 
 SURFACE , NAME = surface_name , TYPE = ELEMENT 
 element number or element set , For example, double-sided surfaces on the elements in element
set SHELL can be defined using input similar
to SURFACE , NAME =BSURF, TYPE = ELEMENT 
SHELL, Abaqus/CAE Usage Any module except Sketch, Job, and Visualization: Tools Surface Create : Name: surface_name , pick face in viewport, click mouse button 2, and choose Both sides 
 Defining Edge-Based Surfaces 
 You can define an edge-based surface on three-dimensional shell, membrane,
 surface, or rigid elements by specifying the individual edges. Alternatively,
 you can specify that all the edges of the elements that are on the exterior
 (free) surface of the model are used to form the surface; this method cannot be
 used to define edge-based surfaces that are in the interior of the model. It is
 possible to use both methods in the same surface definition when creating a
 single surface. 
 Input File Usage Use the following option to specify the individual edges that
form the surface: SURFACE , NAME = surface_name , TYPE = ELEMENT 
 element number or element set, edge identifier The individual edge identifiers used in 
 Abaqus 
are listed in 
 Table 2 . 
 Use the following option to specify that all the edges of the elements
that are on the exterior (free) surface of the model are used to form the
surface: SURFACE , NAME = surface_name , TYPE = ELEMENT 
 element number or element set , EDGE For example, if the shaded element set in the figure below is
composed of three-dimensional shell elements and is named
 ESETA , the surface named
 ESURF could be specified by the following
input: SURFACE , NAME =ESURF, TYPE = ELEMENT 
ESETA, EDGE 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage Any module except Sketch, Job, and Visualization: Tools Surface Create : Name: surface_name , pick edges in viewport In 
 Abaqus/CAE 
you can specify that all the edges of the elements that are on the exterior
(free) surface of the model are used to form the surface by directly picking
all the free edges in the viewport. 
 Defining a Surface over the Cross-Section at the Ends of Beam, Pipe, and Truss Elements 
 To define a surface over the cross-section of beam, pipe, or truss elements,
 you must specify the end on which the surface is defined. Surfaces created on
 the ends of these elements can be used only for integrated output request (see 
 Integrated Output ) and
 integrated output section (see 
 Integrated Output Section Definition )
 definitions. 
 Input File Usage Use the following option to define a surface over the
cross-section of a beam, pipe, or truss element: SURFACE , NAME = surface_name , TYPE = ELEMENT 
 element number or element set , END1 or END2 Abaqus/CAE Usage Any module except Sketch, Job, and Visualization: Tools Surface Create : Name: surface_name , pick three-dimensional wire region in viewport, click mouse button 2, and choose End (Magenta) or End (Yellow) 
 Defining a Surface along the Length of Three-Dimensional Beam, Pipe, and Truss Elements 
 You cannot specify the faces to define a surface along the length of
 three-dimensional beams, pipes, or trusses because their element connectivity
 cannot define a unique element or surface normal. Instead, you must specify
 that 
 Abaqus 
 should generate a surface for these elements. Therefore, the use of surfaces
 along the length of these elements is restricted. 
 In Abaqus/Standard element-based surfaces created along the length of three-dimensional beam, pipe, or
 truss elements can be used with the general contact algorithm or tie constraints. In a
 contact pair simulation, they can be used only as secondary surfaces. There are several
 advantages to using an element-based surface rather than a node-based surface when
 modeling contact in Abaqus/Standard with three-dimensional beams, pipes, or trusses: 
 The default local tangent directions are parallel and orthogonal to the
 element axis. 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 calculates the contact results as contact forces per unit length rather than
 just contact forces. 
 It can be easier to define an element-based surface than a node-based
 surface. 
 In 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 a surface definition is not allowed for cases where three or more
 three-dimensional beams, pipes, or trusses are joined at a common node because
 of the lack of uniquely defined element tangents. 
 In 
 Abaqus/Explicit 
 element-based surfaces created along the length of three-dimensional beam,
 pipe, or truss elements can be used only with the general contact algorithm or
 tie constraints. To define contact for these elements using the contact pair
 algorithm, the nodes forming the beam, pipe, or truss elements can be included
 in a node-based surface definition ( Node-Based Surface Definition )
 and a contact pair can be defined for this node-based surface and a
 non-node-based surface. 
 Surfaces along the length of three-dimensional beam, pipe, or truss elements
 cannot be used to prescribe a distributed surface load since the loading
 direction is not unique. 
 Input File Usage Use the following option to define a surface along the length
of a three-dimensional beam, pipe, or truss element: SURFACE , NAME = surface_name , TYPE = ELEMENT 
 element number or element set , Abaqus/CAE Usage Any module except Sketch, Job, and Visualization: Tools Surface Create : Name: surface_name , pick three-dimensional wire region in viewport, click mouse button 2, and choose Circumferential 
 Surfaces along the Length of Two-Dimensional Beam, Pipe, and Truss Elements 
 Surfaces created along the length of two-dimensional beam, pipe, and truss elements can be used
 as main surfaces in a contact pair simulation because the underlying elements have unique
 element normals that lie in the plane of the model. These surfaces can also be used to
 prescribe distributed surface loads. 
 Shell, Membrane, or Rigid Element Thickness and Shell Offset 
 Some applications that refer to surfaces will account for underlying element
 thicknesses and any offset of the midsurface relative to the reference surface
 for surfaces based on shell, membrane, or rigid elements. For example, all of
 the contact algorithms available in 
 Abaqus/Explicit 
 can account for these effects. Of the contact algorithms available in 
 Abaqus/Standard ,
 only the surface-to-surface small-sliding contact formulation can account for
 these effects. See the following sections for additional details on
 applications that can account for surface thickness and offset: 
 Mesh Tie Constraints 
 Contact Formulations in Abaqus/Standard 
 Assigning Surface Properties for General Contact in Abaqus/Explicit 
 Assigning Surface Properties for Contact Pairs in Abaqus/Explicit 
 Creating Surfaces on Gasket Elements 
 When surfaces are defined on gasket elements, automatic surface facet
 generation cannot be used because only the top and bottom element faces can be
 used to create surfaces (see 
 About Gasket Elements ).
 Abaqus/Standard 
 cannot create surfaces on gasket link elements since the top and bottom
 surfaces are each reduced to a single node. For other gasket elements you must
 specify the top and bottom surfaces directly. The positive face of the element
 is in the thickness direction of the element. The definition of the thickness
 direction of all gasket elements is given in 
 Defining the Gasket Element's Initial Geometry .
 The negative face is defined as the face in the direction opposite to the
 thickness direction of the element. 
 Input File Usage Use the following option to define a surface on the positive
face of a gasket element: SURFACE , NAME = surface_name , TYPE = ELEMENT 
 element number or element set , SPOS Use the following option to define a surface on the negative
face of a gasket element: SURFACE , NAME = surface_name , TYPE = ELEMENT 
 element number or element set , SNEG For example, single-sided surfaces on the positive faces of
the elements in element set GASKET can be
defined using input similar to SURFACE , NAME =BSURF, TYPE = ELEMENT 
GASKET, SPOS Abaqus/CAE Usage Any module except Sketch, Job, and Visualization: Tools Surface Create : Name: surface_name , pick top or bottom faces in viewport 
 Surfaces on Three-Dimensional Gasket Line Elements 
 There are several advantages to using an element-based surface rather than a
 node-based surface when modeling contact in 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 with three-dimensional gasket line elements: 
 The local tangent directions are parallel and orthogonal to the gasket
 line element, which is useful for output purposes and for anisotropic friction
 definition. 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 calculates the contact results as contact forces per unit length rather than
 just contact forces. 
 Surfaces created on three-dimensional gasket line elements can be used only as secondary surfaces
 because Abaqus/Standard cannot form unique normals for these surfaces. 
 Creating Interior Cross-Section Surfaces 
 To study the “force-flow” through various paths in a model, you must create
 interior surfaces that cut through one or more components (similar to a
 cross-section) so that you can request integrated output of the total force
 transmitted across these surfaces (see 
 Requesting Integrated Output for “Force-Flow” Studies ).
 Abaqus 
 provides a simple method to create such an interior surface over the element
 facets, edges, or ends by cutting through a region of the model with a plane.
 The region can be identified using one or more element sets. If no element sets
 are specified, the region consists of the whole model. The cutting plane is
 defined by specifying the coordinates of a point on the plane and a vector
 normal to the plane. Alternatively, the cutting plane can be defined by
 specifying the global node numbers of point a on the plane
 and point b that lies off the cutting plane with the
 normal determined as the vector from point a to point
 b . 
 Abaqus 
 then automatically forms a surface close to the specified cutting plane by
 selecting the element facets, edges, or ends of the continuum solid, shell,
 membrane, surface, beam, pipe, truss, or rigid elements in the selected region.
 The surface generated in this manner is an approximation for the cutting plane.
 Multi-point mesh constraints are ignored while generating the interior
 surface based on the cutting plane; therefore, the result may be a surface that is not
 continuous if these constraints stitch disjointed meshes together in a region that is cut by
 the cutting plane. When the cutting plane
 intersects a beam, pipe, or truss element, the entire element is shown in the Visualization module of Abaqus/CAE as being part of the surface. However, if this surface is used for integrated output,
 only the element nodal forces from the element end that lies on the positive side as
 defined by the normal to the cutting plane are included in the integrated output. 
 Point mass and rotary elements, connector elements, spot welds, and spring elements will not
 be part of the generated surface even if they are cut by the cutting plane. Input File Usage Use the following option to define the cutting surface by
specifying coordinates of a point on the plane and a vector normal to the
plane: SURFACE , NAME = surface_name , TYPE = CUTTING SURFACE , DEFINITION = COORDINATES Use the following option to define the cutting surface by
specifying global node numbers of points a and
 b : SURFACE , NAME = surface_name , TYPE = CUTTING SURFACE , DEFINITION = NODES Abaqus/CAE Usage 
 Interior cross-section surfaces are not supported in 
 Abaqus/CAE . 
 Whole-Model Free Surface in an Abaqus/Explicit Input File 
 In an 
 Abaqus/Explicit 
 input file you can create a surface containing the exposed faces of all
 elements (and “contact edges” of beam, pipe, and truss elements) in the model
 except cohesive elements by specifying a blank element set name and a blank
 face identifier. This “free” surface of the model can be used as the base
 surface for the cropping and combining operations; without modifications this
 surface is similar to the default all-inclusive surface commonly used in
 general contact (see 
 About General Contact in Abaqus/Explicit ).
 Input File Usage SURFACE , NAME = surface_name , TYPE = ELEMENT 
, Abaqus/CAE Usage 
 The whole-model automatic free surface generation method is not supported
in 
 Abaqus/CAE . 
 Trimming the Perimeter of an Open Surface 
 An “open” surface is one that has ends in two dimensions or an outside edge
 in three dimensions. The ends of a two-dimensional surface and the edge of a
 three-dimensional surface are called the surface's “perimeter.” Since 
 Abaqus 
 allows a surface to be defined as only a part of the surface of a body, it may
 have a perimeter even though it is defined on a closed body. 
 Abaqus 
 automatically performs surface “trimming” on solid element meshes. You can
 change the default setting when a surface is created, providing some basic
 control over the extent of surfaces. 
 Surface trimming: 
 is a recursive procedure that removes undesirable convex corners near
 the perimeter of an open surface (see the example below for details); 
 has no effect on closed surfaces (ones with no ends or edges); 
 is performed automatically, unless the surface is used as a main surface in a finite-sliding
 simulation in Abaqus/Standard or the surface is used with the contact pair algorithm in Abaqus/Explicit ; 
 can be used only for external surfaces on solid element meshes (either
 specified surfaces or automatically generated free surfaces); and 
 has no effect on surfaces used with the contact pair algorithm in 
 Abaqus/Explicit .
 Input File Usage Use the following option to suppress automatic surface
trimming: SURFACE , TYPE = ELEMENT , NAME = surface_name , TRIM = NO Abaqus/CAE Usage 
 Automatic surface trimming cannot be suppressed in 
 Abaqus/CAE . 
 The Effect of Surface Trimming 
 The effect of surface trimming is best explained by means of an example. 
 Figure 3 
 illustrates the effect of trimming for two different surfaces defined on the
 same simple two-dimensional mesh. 
 Figure 3. Case I: Faces A and B are
 removed when trimming is done since one node of each of the faces is an end
 node and the other is a corner node. Case II :
 Faces A and B are not removed when
 trimming is done since one node of each of the faces is an end node but the
 other is not a corner node. 
 In Case I the surface definition consists of a single layer of elements on
 the perimeter of the model. Using automatic surface facet generation, the
 resulting default surface (curve) includes the vertical element faces
 A and B since these faces lie on the
 perimeter of the model. Trimming the default surface created in Case I
 eliminates faces A and B since their
 presence results in the two spurious corners near the perimeter of the curve. 
 Abaqus 
 uses a special criterion in deciding to remove faces A and
 B from the original open curve. A face is removed if one
 of its end nodes is an endpoint and either of the following is true: another
 face node is a node on an element corner belonging to the curve or the face
 normal differs by more than 30° from the normal of an adjacent face also
 belonging to the curve. To be a node on an element corner belonging to the
 curve means to be a node on two different faces of the same element, both of
 which are part of the curve. The face removal criterion is applied recursively
 to the curve definition until all corners on or near the perimeter of the curve
 have been removed. This procedure is generalized for three-dimensional surface
 definitions. 
 In Case II in 
 Figure 3 
 trimming would not result in the elimination of faces A 
 and B because neither of the endpoints of these two faces
 meets the criterion described above. 
 Why Abaqus Will, by Default, Trim Most Surfaces 
 Trimming of surfaces used for application of distributed loads is usually
 desired since loads are normally applied to specific sides of a body. Any
 surface that is used for application of a distributed load will, by default, be
 trimmed. 
 In Abaqus/Standard trimming the secondary surface in contact or interaction simulations results in more
 accurate estimates of the contact pressures, heat fluxes, and electrical current densities
 along the perimeter of the surface. Any surface that is used as a secondary surface in a
 contact or interaction simulation will, by default, be trimmed. If the secondary surface
 is left untrimmed, the nodes at the corners of the surface will be assigned additional
 contact area from the element faces around the corners that may never be involved in the
 interaction between the surfaces. This additional contact area introduces errors into the
 estimates of the contact output variables at those nodes. Main surfaces in small-sliding
 simulations will, by default, be trimmed; Abaqus/Standard will normally form a better approximate surface. However, main surfaces in
 finite-sliding contact simulations will, by default, be left untrimmed, and they should
 extend far enough away from all expected regions of contact. This practice protects
 against the possibility of the secondary surface nodes sliding off the main surface (see
 Common Difficulties Associated with Contact Modeling in Abaqus/Standard ).