About General Contact in Abaqus/Standard 
 About General Contact in Abaqus/Standard Abaqus/Standard provides two algorithms for modeling contact and interaction problems: the general contact
 algorithm and the contact pair algorithm. 
See About Contact Interactions for a comparison of the two algorithms. This section
 describes how to include general contact in an Abaqus/Standard analysis, how to specify the regions of the model involved in general contact interactions,
 and how to obtain output from a general contact analysis. The general
 contact algorithm in Abaqus/Standard : 
 is specified as part of the model definition; 
 allows very simple definitions of contact with very few
 restrictions on the types of surfaces involved; 
 uses sophisticated tracking algorithms to ensure that proper
 contact conditions are enforced efficiently; 
 can be used simultaneously with the contact pair algorithm (that
 is, some interactions can be modeled with the general contact algorithm, while others are
 modeled with the contact pair algorithm); 
 can be used with two- or three-dimensional surfaces; and 
 by default, uses the finite-sliding, surface-to-surface contact
 formulation as the primary contact formulation, supplemented by the edge-to-surface,
 edge-to-edge, and vertex-to-surface contact formulations. You can also specify a
 small-sliding tracking approach over portions or the entire general contact domain. 
 This page discusses: Defining a General Contact Interaction Surfaces Used for General Contact Types of Contact Formulations within General Contact
 Targeting Various Scenarios Including General Contact in an Analysis Defining the General Contact Domain Deactivating and Reactivating Contact Interactions across
 Steps Edge-to-Surface Contact Scenarios Edge-to-Edge Contact Scenarios Vertex-to-Surface Contact Scenarios Output 
 See Also About Contact Interactions Contact Property Models In Other Guides *CONTACT *CONTACT INCLUSIONS *CONTACT EXCLUSIONS Defining general contact 
 Products 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 Abaqus/CAE 
 Defining a General Contact Interaction 
 The definition of a general contact interaction consists of
 specifying: 
 the general contact algorithm and defining the contact domain
 (that is, the surfaces that interact with one another), as described in this section;
 the contact surface properties ( Surface Properties for General Contact in Abaqus/Standard ); 
 the mechanical contact property models ( Contact Properties for General Contact in Abaqus/Standard ); 
 the controls associated with the initial contact state ( Contact Initialization for General Contact in Abaqus/Standard ); and 
 the algorithmic contact controls ( Contact Controls Specific to General Contact in Abaqus/Standard ). 
 See Impact analysis of a pawl-ratchet device for an example of
 an analysis that uses general contact to define contact between the various components of an
 assembly. 
 Surfaces Used for General Contact 
 The
 general contact algorithm in Abaqus/Standard allows for quite general characteristics in the surfaces that it uses, as discussed in
 About Contact Interactions . For detailed
 information on defining surfaces in Abaqus/Standard for use with the general contact algorithm, see Element-Based Surface Definition . 
 In addition, Abaqus/Standard automatically defines an all-inclusive surface that is convenient for prescribing the
 contact domain, as discussed later in this section. The all-inclusive automatically defined
 surface includes all element-based surface facets, crack surfaces for enriched elements, and
 analytical rigid surfaces. 
 The general contact algorithm does not consider contact involving
 node-based surfaces, although Abaqus/Standard can include these surfaces in contact pairs in analyses that also use general contact.
 Contact Surface Representation for Beams 
 By default, Abaqus/Standard approximates the contact surface geometry of a noncircular beam cross-section with a
 circular cross-section encompassing the actual cross-section, as discussed in Edge-to-Surface Contact Scenarios . Figure 1 shows a
 rectangular cross-section beam on the left side and the default circular representation
 for contact on the right side of Figure 1 . Figure 1. Beam element profile rendering for circular versus
 rectangular cross-section beams. 
 In many cases, modeling noncircular beam cross sections as
 equivalent circular beams is an acceptable modeling practice. However, in some cases you
 need a more accurate representation of the beam geometry. In such situations, Abaqus/Standard allows you to select a nondefault option to more accurately model the beam
 cross-section geometries listed in Beam Cross-Section Library (see Figure 2 for example).
 When you activate the higher fidelity option, beams with circular cross-sections use
 contact edges with the same radius as the beam cross-section; beams with noncircular
 cross-sections model the beam surfaces with automatically generated meshes of
 quadrilateral surface elements. For example, Figure 3 shows
 such a mesh for a beam with a rectangular cross-section meshed with B31 and B32 elements, respectively. Nodes of
 the quadrilateral surface elements are offset to vertices of the cross-section at axial
 locations of the beam nodes. The motion of each node is driven by the corresponding beam
 node via a beam MPC (see Using MPC Type BEAM ). Abaqus/Standard redistributes contact forces acting on these nodes to the original beam nodes as forces
 and moments. The surface element surfaces inherit the associated general contact property
 assignments on the corresponding beam element surfaces. The mesh of the quadrilateral
 surface elements for noncircular beam cross-sections is available for postprocessing (see
 Output for Beams with Actual Beam Cross-Section Representation ). Figure 2. Beams with various cross-sections. 
 Figure 3. Surface elements representation for beams with a box
 cross-section. 
 A surface thickness is assigned to the surface element facets
 associated with noncircular beam cross-sections. The surface thickness is selected based
 on the actual thickness of each segment of the beam cross-section profile. Assigning a
 nonzero surface thickness for contact (see Surface Thickness ) to a noncircular beam cross-section has the same effect on the surface element
 surfaces as for a solid surface. Nonzero surface thickness effectively expands the contact
 cross-section for the beam and rounds the corners (without influencing the beam
 stiffness), as shown in Figure 4 . Figure 4. Effect of surface thickness for a rectangular beam
 cross-section. 
 Input File Usage 
 Use the following option to activate contact
 calculations based on a circumferential approximation of the beam element (default): 
 CONTACT CONTROLS ASSIGNMENT , BEAM CROSS SECTION = CIRCUMSCRIBED CIRCLE 
 Use the following option to activate contact
 calculations based on the actual cross-section of the beam element: 
 CONTACT CONTROLS ASSIGNMENT , BEAM CROSS SECTION = EXACT 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage 
 Defining the beam cross-section assignment is not supported in Abaqus/CAE . 
 Types of Contact Formulations within General Contact
 Targeting Various Scenarios 
 The general contact algorithm in Abaqus/Standard offers capabilities to model surface-to-surface contact, edge-to-surface contact,
 edge-to-edge contact, and vertex-to-surface contact with the default finite-sliding tracking
 approach. The surface-to-surface contact formulation is the primary formulation with
 three-dimensional models and is the only formulation for general contact with
 two-dimensional and axisymmetric models. 
 You can specify the small-sliding tracking approach to model
 surface-to-surface contact, but small sliding is not supported with edges and vertices (see
 Specifying Small Sliding within General Contact ).
 The finite-sliding tracking approach is the preferred approach due to its generality in
 handling arbitrary relative surface motions. However, small sliding in general contact
 provides a highly automated and convenient contact modeling approach in situations where
 relative surface motions are known to be small. 
 Pure heat transfer and coupled thermal-electrical contact
 interactions support surface-to-surface contact as well as edge-to-surface contact with a
 beam edge acting as the main contact entity. 
 For three-dimensional models, the surface-to-surface contact
 formulation primarily treats cases with contact over an area of dimensions significant
 compared to the surface facet dimensions, such as the case on the left in Figure 5 . General contact with finite sliding for three-dimensional models uses the other contact
 formulations as supplementary formulations. For example, the second, third, and fourth cases
 in Figure 5 is treated with the edge-to-surface, edge-to-edge, and vertex-to-surface formulations,
 respectively. General contact also uses the supplementary formulations to treat contact
 involving three-dimensional beam and truss elements. The surface-to-surface,
 edge-to-surface, and vertex-to-surface formulations can treat contact interactions in which
 one surface (which does not represent an edge or a vertex) is an analytical rigid surface.
 General contact does not consider contact between two analytical rigid surfaces. 
 Figure 5. Contact scenario types for two blocks. 
 Transitions between the predominant type of contact formulation
 active in a local region are common. For example, the edge-to-surface contact formulation
 would be predominant at the stage of the snap-fit simulation shown in Figure 6 because the active contact zone corresponds to a feature edge. 
 Figure 6. Snap-fit example involving feature edge-to-surface
 contact with an oblique angle between surface normals in the contact region. 
 Upon further insertion, the surface-to-surface contact formulation
 would become predominant once the top surface of the darker colored part is in contact with
 the other part over a significant area. General contact automatically handles transitions
 between predominant contact formulations as contact conditions evolve. Multiple types of
 contact constraints are locally active during transitions. The supplementary contact
 formulations are always enforced with a penalty method, which helps avoid numerical issues
 with “over-constraints” while multiple constraint types are active. 
 For two-dimensional and axisymmetric models, surfaces based on
 solid, shell, beam, and truss elements consist of linear or quadratic segments (sometimes
 referred to as two-dimensional faces). For three-dimensional models, beam and truss surfaces
 are comprised of segments (sometimes referred to as "edges"), whereas surfaces based on
 three-dimensional solid, shell, and membrane elements consist of triangular or quadrilateral
 faces (and edges of face boundaries). Due to the similarity of two-dimensional surfaces
 among element types, the two-dimensional surface-to-surface contact formulation can treat
 surfaces based on solid, shell, beam, and truss elements. The three-dimensional
 surface-to-surface contact formulation treats surfaces based on solid and shell elements but
 does not treat beam or truss surfaces. 
 See Surface-to-Surface Contact Discretization for additional
 discussion of the surface-to-surface contact formulation. See Edge-to-Surface Contact Scenarios , Edge-to-Edge Contact Scenarios , and Vertex-to-Surface Contact Scenarios below, for more
 information on the supplementary contact formulations. 
 Including General Contact in an Analysis 
 You can specify an overall general contact definition in multiple
 portions as model and step data in Abaqus/Standard . However, you must define the envelope of contact interactions eligible to be considered
 by general contact in one or more of these portions as model data. 
 Input File Usage 
 Use the following option to indicate the beginning
 of a portion of the general contact specification: 
 CONTACT 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage 
 Interaction module: Create Interaction : Step: Initial , General contact (Standard) 
 Defining the General Contact Domain 
 The general contact domain is the envelope of potential
 interactions for a simulation and the associated surface entities (nodes, faces, etc.). You
 determine the general contact domain based on general contact inclusions and exclusions that
 you specify at the model level and implied contact exclusions based on other model-level
 features such as contact pairs and surface-based tie constraints. If you specify an
 all-inclusive contact inclusion at the model level together with a contact exclusion between
 nonoverlapping surfaces A and B, the general contact domain includes potential interactions
 between all surface entities of the model (even for surfaces that you have not explicitly
 defined and named) except for potential interactions between surfaces A and B. Entities of
 surfaces A and B can still experience self-contact and contact with surfaces other than A
 and B. Exclusions take precedence over inclusions at the model level regardless of which
 definition appears first. 
 Named surfaces used in the definition of general contact can span
 multiple unattached bodies. For example, if you allow a named surface spanning multiple
 bodies to possibly contact itself, contact will be enforced between the entities of that
 surface from the same body or different bodies. 
 You can deactivate interactions that you specify at the model level
 and subsequently reactivate them across steps. Define contact exclusions at the step level
 to deactivate certain interactions of the contact domain. Define contact inclusions to
 reactivate the interactions in a subsequent step (see Deactivating and Reactivating Contact Interactions across Steps ). 
 Specifying Contact Inclusions 
 Define contact inclusions to specify the regions of the model
 that Abaqus/Standard should consider for contact purposes. 
 Specifying “Automatic” Contact for the Entire
 Model 
 You can specify self-contact for a default unnamed,
 all-inclusive surface defined automatically by Abaqus/Standard . This default surface contains, with the exceptions noted below, all exterior element
 faces and all analytical rigid surfaces. This is the simplest way to define the contact
 domain. 
 The default surface does not include faces that belong only to
 cohesive elements. In fact, the default surface is generated as if cohesive elements
 were not present. See Modeling with Cohesive Elements for further
 discussion of contact modeling issues related to cohesive elements. 
 Input File Usage 
 Use both of the following options to specify
 “automatic” contact for the entire model: 
 CONTACT 
 CONTACT INCLUSIONS , ALL EXTERIOR 
 The CONTACT INCLUSIONS option should have no data lines when the ALL EXTERIOR parameter is
 used. 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage 
 Interaction module: Create Interaction : General contact (Standard) : Included surface pairs: All* with self 
 Specifying Individual Contact Interactions 
 Alternatively, you can define the general contact domain
 directly by specifying the individual contact surface pairings. Self-contact is modeled
 only if the two surfaces specified in a pair overlap (or are identical) and are modeled
 only in the overlapping region. In some cases you can improve computational performance
 and robustness by including only portions of surfaces in the general contact domain that
 will experience contact during an analysis. 
 You can include multiple surface pairings in the contact
 domain. All of the surfaces specified must be element-based surfaces. Edge-based
 surfaces cannot be included using this method. 
 Input File Usage 
 Use both of the following options to specify
 individual contact interactions: 
 CONTACT 
 CONTACT INCLUSIONS 
 surface_1 , surface_2 
 At least one data line must be specified when
 the ALL EXTERIOR parameter
 is omitted. You can leave either or both of the data line entries blank, but each data
 line must contain at least a comma; an error message will be issued for empty data
 lines. If you omit the first surface name, Abaqus/Standard assumes the default unnamed, all-inclusive, automatically generated surface. If the
 second surface name is omitted or is the same as the first surface name, contact
 between the first surface and itself is assumed. Leaving both data line entries blank
 is equivalent to using the ALL EXTERIOR parameter. 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage 
 Interaction module: Create Interaction : General contact (Standard) : Included surface pairs: Selected surface pairs: Edit , select the surfaces in the columns on the left, and click the arrows in the middle to transfer them to the list of included pairs 
 Examples 
 The following input specifies that contact should be enforced
 between the default all-inclusive, automatically generated surface and surface_2 , including self-contact in
 any overlap regions: 
 CONTACT 
 CONTACT INCLUSIONS 
 , surface_2 
 Either of the following methods can be used to define
 self-contact for surface_1 : 
 CONTACT 
 CONTACT INCLUSIONS 
 surface_1 , 
 or 
 CONTACT 
 CONTACT INCLUSIONS 
 surface_1 , surface_1 
 Specifying Contact Exclusions 
 You can refine the contact domain definition by specifying the
 regions of the model to exclude from contact. Possible motivations for specifying contact
 exclusions include: 
 avoiding physically unreasonable contact interactions; 
 improving computational performance by excluding parts of the
 model that are not likely to interact. 
 Contact is ignored for all the surface pairings specified, even
 if these interactions are specified directly or indirectly in the contact inclusions
 definition. 
 Multiple surface pairings can be excluded from the contact
 domain. All of the surfaces specified must be element-based surfaces. Keep in mind that
 surfaces can be defined to span multiple unattached bodies, so self-contact exclusions are
 not limited to exclusions of single-body contact. 
 Input File Usage 
 Use both of the following options to specify
 contact exclusions: 
 CONTACT 
 CONTACT EXCLUSIONS 
 surface_1 , surface_2 
 You can leave either or both of the data line
 entries blank. If you omit the first surface name, Abaqus/Standard assumes the default unnamed, all-inclusive, automatically generated surface. If you
 omit the second surface name or you use the same as the first surface name, contact
 between the first surface and itself is excluded from the contact domain. 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage 
 Interaction module: Create Interaction : General contact (Standard) : Excluded surface pairs: Edit , select the surfaces in the columns on the left, and click the arrows in the middle to transfer them to the list of excluded pairs 
 Automatically Generated Contact Exclusions 
 Abaqus/Standard automatically generates contact exclusions for general contact in some situations. 
 Contact exclusions are generated automatically for
 interactions that are defined with the contact pair algorithm or surface-based tie
 constraints to avoid redundant (and possibly inconsistent) enforcement of these
 interaction constraints. For example, if a contact pair is defined for surface_1 and surface_2 and
 “automatic” general contact is defined for the entire model, Abaqus/Standard generates a contact exclusion for general contact between surface_1 and surface_2 so that
 interactions between these surfaces are modeled only with the contact pair
 algorithm. These automatically generated contact exclusions are in effect throughout
 the analysis. 
 Abaqus/Standard automatically generates contact exclusions for self-contact of each rigid body in
 the model, because a rigid body cannot contact itself. 
 When you specify pure main-secondary contact surface
 weighting for a particular general contact surface pair, contact exclusions are
 generated automatically for the main-secondary orientation opposite to that
 specified (see Contact Controls Specific to General Contact in Abaqus/Standard for more information on this type of
 contact exclusion). 
 Abaqus/Standard assigns default pure main-secondary roles for contact involving disconnected
 bodies within the general contact domain, and contact exclusions are generated by
 default for the opposite main-secondary orientations. Options to override the
 default pure main-secondary assignments with alternative pure main-secondary
 assignments or balanced main-secondary assignments are discussed in Contact Controls Specific to General Contact in Abaqus/Standard . 
 Contact exclusions are generated automatically for portions
 of surfaces that are severely overclosed in the initial configuration of the model.
 See Contact Initialization for General Contact in Abaqus/Standard for more information. 
 Example: Automatically Generated Contact
 Exclusions 
 The following input specifies that the contact domain is based
 on self-contact of an all-inclusive, automatically generated surface but that contact
 (including self-contact in any overlap regions) should be ignored between the
 all-inclusive, automatically generated surface and surface_2 : 
 CONTACT 
 CONTACT INCLUSIONS , ALL EXTERIOR 
 CONTACT EXCLUSIONS 
 , surface_2 
 Use either of the following methods to exclude self-contact for
 surface_1 from the contact
 domain: 
 CONTACT EXCLUSIONS 
 surface_1 , 
 or 
 CONTACT EXCLUSIONS 
 surface_1 , surface_1 
 Deactivating and Reactivating Contact Interactions across
 Steps 
 You can deactivate general contact interactions established at the
 model level and subsequently reactivate them across steps using contact exclusions and
 contact inclusions, respectively. Abaqus/Standard issues an error message if you attempt to activate an interaction in a step that is not
 eligible for contact according to the model-level general contact definition. The
 model-level specification establishes the envelope of eligible contact interactions. 
 Consider the following example: A particular forming tool is
 relevant only to contact starting in Step 3 of a simulation. For convenience, set the
 original position of this tool where it will eventually be introduced in the simulation.
 Exclude this part from contact interactions for the first two steps to avoid undesired
 interference. You will: 
 Include the interactions involving this tool at the model
 level. 
 Specify a contact exclusion for this part with the entire model
 in Step 1 to deactivate these contact interactions. 
 Specify a contact inclusion for this part with the entire (or
 desired subset) of the model in Step 3 to reactivate these contact interactions. 
 Specify any needed contact initialization instructions for the
 newly reactivated contact interactions in Step 3. 
 Contact deactivation and subsequent reactivation in analysis steps
 do not require use of the same surface names (nor the same extents of the surfaces) that are
 used to define the model-level contact inclusions that establish the envelope of eligible
 contact interactions. 
 If contact deactivation occurs for contact interactions that were
 actively in contact at the end of the previous step, contact forces (and heat or electrical
 fluxes in the case of additional thermal and electrical interactions) are ramped down for
 contact constraints that were active at the end of the previous general step. 
 Any contact state associated with friction, cohesive contact, etc.,
 is initialized on contact reactivation for interactions that were previously deactivated.
 Specifying a contact inclusion in a step has no effect on the contact state for contacts
 that were not previously deactivated. 
 Some steps might involve deactivation of some contact interactions
 and reactivation of other contact interactions. In the case of overlapping interactions
 between contact inclusions and contact exclusions specified within a step, the contact
 exclusions take precedence. 
 Step-dependent activation and deactivation are not supported for
 heat transfer, coupled thermal-electrical, and coupled thermal-electrochemical procedures.
 Similarly, step-dependent activation and deactivation are not allowed for general contact
 with XFEM surfaces anywhere in the
 model. For the small-sliding tracking approach in general contact, portions of the model
 where small-sliding is specified also cannot participate in step-dependent activation and
 deactivation. 
 Example: Deactivating and Reactivating Contact Interactions
 across Steps 
 In this example, the contact domain established at the model
 level includes all potential contact interactions in a model using the following
 options. 
 CONTACT 
 CONTACT INCLUSIONS , ALL EXTERIOR 
 Contact interactions between surf_A and surf_B are deactivated in Step 2 using
 the following options. 
 STEP 
…
 CONTACT 
 CONTACT EXCLUSIONS 
 surf_A , surf_B 
…
 END STEP 
 Contact interactions between an implied all-inclusive surface and
 surf_Reactivate are reactivated,
 and all interactions involving surf_C are deactivated in Step 3 using the following options (here surf_Reactivate is a subset of surf_A ): 
 STEP 
…
 CONTACT 
 CONTACT INCLUSIONS 
, surf_Reactivate 
 CONTACT EXCLUSIONS 
, surf_C 
…
 END STEP 
 Edge-to-Surface Contact Scenarios 
 The general contact algorithm can consider three-dimensional
 edge-to-surface contact. In addition to modeling contact between segments of beam or truss
 elements and faceted surfaces, it is more effective at resolving some interactions than the
 surface-to-surface contact formulation. Figure 6 and Figure 7 show examples in which the edge-to-surface contact formulation is most effective for
 resolving contact. 
 Figure 7. Edge-to-surface contact examples. 
 The bottom-right example in Figure 7 shows a feature edge of an element-based surface in contact with an analytical rigid
 surface. The feature edges of an analytical rigid surface do not act as edges in the
 edge-to-surface formulation. You can enhance convergence behavior by avoiding feature edges
 and corners in analytical rigid surfaces used for contact: Instead, use smooth analytical
 rigid surfaces with continuously varying surface normal directions for contact. 
 Contact edges representing three-dimensional beam and truss
 elements have a circular cross-section (regardless of the actual cross-section of the beam
 or truss element), unless you enable actual beam cross-section representation for beams with
 noncircular cross-sections (see Contact Surface Representation for Beams ). The radius of a contact edge representing a three-dimensional truss element is derived
 from the cross-sectional area specified on the truss section definition (it is equal to the
 radius of a solid circular section with an equivalent cross-sectional area). For
 three-dimensional beams with circular cross-sections, the radius of the contact edge is
 equivalent to the section radius. For three-dimensional beams with noncircular
 cross-sections, the radius of the contact edge is equal to the radius of a circumscribed
 circle around the section. Edge-to-surface contact for three-dimensional beam or truss
 elements is activated by including the associated surfaces into the general contact domain.
 By default, the all-inclusive surface contains surfaces based on beam or truss elements. 
 The surface thickness for two-dimensional beam segments corresponds
 to the in-plane thickness of the beam section. The surface thickness for two-dimensional
 truss segments corresponds to the radius of a solid circular section with an equivalent
 cross-sectional area as specified for the truss section. Beams and trusses are treated only
 with the surface-to-surface contact formulation in general contact, as discussed in Types of Contact Formulations within General Contact Targeting Various Scenarios . 
 Beam section offsets, specified either as part of the beam cross
 section definition or directly, are neglected for contact interactions in Abaqus/Standard . 
 The edge-to-surface contact formulation is commonly used to resist
 penetrations of feature edges of one surface into a relatively smooth portion of another
 surface (which might be an analytical rigid surface), with the contact normal direction
 based on the relatively smooth surface. The main and secondary roles of surfaces in the
 edge-to-surface contact formulation are reversed for some situations involving
 large-diameter beams. By default, if half of the beam radius exceeds the facet dimensions of
 the other surface, the beam acts as the main surface such that the edge-to-surface contact
 formulation resists penetrations of a smooth portion of a neighboring solid or shell surface
 into a beam, with the contact normal direction based on the radial direction of the beam.
 The bottom-left example in Figure 7 corresponds to such a case with a relatively large diameter beam (see Main and Secondary Surface Roles of a Contact Formulation for details about how to control main and secondary
 assignment). 
 In pure heat transfer and coupled thermal-electrical analyses, only
 the edge-to-surface formulation with the one-dimensional line ("beam") element–based
 surfaces acting as the main is supported. Consequently, these line element–based surfaces
 act as the main by default. The line elements are intended to model higher dimensional
 physics with a one-dimensional idealization. They are expected to have a cross-sectional
 (beam) radius that is comparable to the facet dimensions of the surrounding surfaces to
 obtain accurate results for thermal/electrical interactions. 
 The edge-to-surface contact formulation considers twisting of beams
 only for cases in which the contact normal is based on the radial direction of the beam.
 When considered, beam twisting influences the calculation of incremental slip. 
 By default, when a surface is used in a general contact
 interaction, all applicable facets are included in the contact definition along with edges
 of solid and shell elements with feature angles of at least 45°. See Feature Edges for a
 discussion of controls related to which feature edges are considered for edge-to-surface
 contact. Edge-to-surface contact constraints never participate in thermal, electrical, or
 pore pressure contact properties. For example, in a coupled temperature-displacement
 analysis, surface-to-surface constraints can influence mechanical and thermal interactions;
 but, if edge-to-surface constraints are included, they will only help resist penetrations. 
 The contact area associated with a feature edge depends on the mesh
 size; therefore, contact pressures (in units of force per area) associated with
 edge-to-surface contact are mesh dependent. 
 Edge-to-Edge Contact Scenarios 
 The general contact algorithm can optionally consider
 three-dimensional edge-to-edge contact except on crack surfaces for enriched elements.
 Feature edges on solid and shell-like surfaces, shell perimeter edges, and edges
 representing beams (and trusses) can be included. Figure 8 shows examples in which the edge-to-edge contact formulation is most effective for
 resolving contact. 
 Figure 8. Edge-to-edge contact examples. 
 Two edge-to-edge contact formulations are available. One
 formulation bases the contact normal direction on the cross product between the two
 respective edges considered for contact, and the other formulation uses a radial direction
 of one of the beams as the contact direction (similar to what is done for tube-to-tube
 contact elements, which are discussed in Tube-to-Tube Contact Elements ). Four of the examples in Figure 8 rely on the formulation with the cross product normal to resist penetrations, and the
 example on the lower right of Figure 8 relies on the formulation with the radial normal. The edge-to-edge contact formulation
 with the radial normal is applicable only to cases with some thickness contributing to the
 contact calculations. 
 The example shown in Figure 9 involves compression of a spring modeled with beam elements. This example relies on the
 edge-to-edge contact formulation with a radial normal direction to resolve contact between
 adjacent spring coils, and it relies on the edge-to-surface contact formulation to resolve
 contact between the spring and other surfaces. 
 Figure 9. Compressing a spring modeled with beam elements. 
 The edge-to-edge contact formulation with a radial normal can
 involve the “exterior” of beam, shell, and solid feature edges and the “interior” of hollow
 beams, as shown in the example in Figure 10 . This example involves a wire modeled with beam elements being wound onto a cylinder
 modeled with solid elements. The wire passes through a hollow cylindrical guide before
 coming onto the cylinder. The “radial” edge-to-edge formulation resolves contact between
 adjacent coils of the wire and also resolves contact between the wire and the interior of
 the hollow beam representing the guide. The edge-to-surface contact formulation resolves
 contact between the wire and the cylinder. 
 Figure 10. Winding a wire onto a cylinder. 
 The edge-to-edge contact formulation with a contact normal
 direction based on the cross product of the edge directions is applicable only while the
 edges are not nearly parallel. The edge-to-edge contact formulation with a radial contact
 normal direction is typically most applicable while contact edges are nearly parallel, but
 Figure 11 shows an exception. The hollow beam is simultaneously in
 contact with the two other beams. The cross product version of the edge-to-edge contact
 formulation resolves contact between the exterior of the hollow beam and the beam that is
 near the top of Figure 11 . The radial version of the edge-to-edge contact formulation
 resolves contact between the interior of the hollow beam and the spiral-shaped beam, with
 the contact direction corresponding to the interior radial direction of the hollow beam. The
 radial version of the edge-to-edge contact formulation is effective in this case because
 individual segments of the spiral-shaped beam span relatively small arcs of the hollow tube. 
 Figure 11. Edge-to-edge contact example with an internal beam
 spiral. 
 In addition to choosing to activate one or both types of
 edge-to-edge contact formulations, you must specify a feature angle criterion to activate
 feature and perimeter edges to participate in edge-to-edge contact. See Feature Edges for a
 discussion of controls related to which feature edges are considered for edge-to-edge
 contact. If only beam edges are present, specifying the contact formulation alone is
 sufficient. 
 Edge-to-edge contact formulations do not consider twisting of the
 beams. Beam-to-beam contact cannot be used to model contact between beam-like elements that
 share nodes with underlying solid or shell elements (for example, beam elements that are
 used to model stringers). 
 Input File Usage 
 Use the following option to activate both
 formulations for edge-to-edge contact: 
 CONTACT FORMULATION , TYPE = EDGE TO EDGE , FORMULATION = BOTH 
 Use the following option to deactivate
 edge-to-edge contact: 
 CONTACT FORMULATION , TYPE = EDGE TO EDGE , FORMULATION = NO (default) 
 Use the following option to activate the radial
 edge-to-edge contact formulation: 
 CONTACT FORMULATION , TYPE = EDGE TO EDGE , FORMULATION = RADIAL 
 Use the following option to activate the
 formulation based on the cross product of the edge directions for edge-to-edge
 contact: 
 CONTACT FORMULATION , TYPE = EDGE TO EDGE , FORMULATION = CROSS 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage 
 Interaction module: Create Interaction : General contact (Standard) : Contact Formulation : toggle on Edge-to-edge formulation assignment , Formulation : select Both , No , Radial , or Cross 
 Vertex-to-Surface Contact Scenarios 
 The general contact algorithm can consider three-dimensional
 vertex-to-surface contact except on crack surfaces for enriched elements. Figure 12 shows examples in which the vertex-to-surface contact formulation is most effective for
 resolving contact. The vertex-to-surface contact formulation is intended to avoid localized
 penetration of a node at a convex corner of a solid or shell/membrane surface or at an end
 point or kink of a beam/truss into a relatively smooth portion of another surface (which may
 be an analytical rigid surface). Most vertex nodes are along feature edges, although, for
 example, a node at the tip of a cone may satisfy the vertex node criteria. See Vertex Nodes for a
 discussion of the vertex node criteria. Vertex nodes are effectively treated as spherical in
 the vertex-to-surface formulation. The spherical radius of the contact vertex corresponds to
 the surface thickness at the node. 
 Figure 12. Vertex-to-surface contact examples. 
 The bottom-right example in Figure 12 shows a vertex node of an element-based surface in contact
 with an analytical rigid surface. The corners of an analytical rigid surface do not act as
 vertices in the vertex-to-surface formulation. Convergence behavior can be enhanced by
 avoiding feature edges and corners in analytical rigid surfaces used for contact and instead
 using smooth analytical rigid surfaces with continuously varying surface normal directions
 for contact. 
 Output 
 Output variables associated with contact fall into two categories:
 nodal variables (sometimes called constraint variables) and whole surface variables. In
 addition, Abaqus outputs an array of diagnostic information associated with contact interactions, as
 discussed in Contact Diagnostics in an Abaqus/Standard Analysis , and
 internal surfaces generated for general contact. 
 For more detailed discussions of
 variables associated with thermal, electrical, and pore fluid analyses, see the sections on
 the related contact properties in Contact Property Models . 
 General Contact Domain and Component Surfaces in Abaqus/Standard 
 Abaqus/Standard generates the following internal surfaces associated with general contact: 
 General_Contact_Faces , 
 General_Contact_Edges , 
 General_Contact_Vertices , 
 General_Contact_Faces_ k , 
 General_Contact_Edges_ k , and 
 General_Contact_Vertices_ k , 
 where k corresponds to an
 automatically assigned “component number.” The three internal surfaces for general contact
 without a component number contain all surface faces, all feature edges, and all vertices,
 respectively, included in the general contact domain. 
 Each feature edge component surface, General_Contact_Edges_ k , has a subset of face edges
 (satisfying the feature edge criteria) of the corresponding face component surface,
 General_Contact_Faces_ k . Each vertex component
 surface, General_Contact_Vertices_ k , has a subset of vertices (satisfying the vertex criteria) of the
 corresponding face component surface, General_Contact_Faces_ k . The face component
 surfaces have no nodes in common with each other, except if beams and trusses are part of
 the contact domain that may share nodes with other faceted component surfaces. By default,
 a lowered-numbered component surface will act as a main surface to a higher-numbered
 component surface for the surface-to-surface and the radial version of the edge-to-edge
 formulations. Component numbers do not influence what is considered by the
 edge-to-surface, vertex-to-surface, and cross version of the edge-to-edge formulations. A
 component surface consisting of beam and truss elements will act as a main surface in the
 edge-to-surface formulation if half of the average element radius is larger than the
 average smallest facet length of the faceted component surface. Component surfaces are
 referred to in diagnostic messages for all formulation types. 
 Abaqus/Standard also generates internal surfaces associated with general contact when material names
 are used to identify regions where nondefault contact properties or surface properties are
 assigned, as discussed in Assigning Contact Properties and Assigning Surface Properties . These internal surfaces are named _MATSURF_ Material Name _ , where Material Name corresponds to the name
 of the material specified for the property assignment. 
 Internal surfaces
 can be viewed using display groups in the Visualization module of Abaqus/CAE . Internal surface names generated by Abaqus/Standard should not be used in model definitions. 
 Nodal Contact Variables 
 Nodal contact
 variables can be contoured on contact surfaces in the Visualization module of Abaqus/CAE . Nodal contact variables include contact pressure and force, frictional shear
 stress and force, relative tangential motion (slip) of the surfaces during contact,
 clearance between surfaces, heat or fluid flux per unit area, and fluid pressure. Many of
 the nodal contact variables written to the output database ( .odb ) file are often available for all
 contact nodes, regardless of whether they act as secondary or main nodes. Other nodal
 contact variables are available only at nodes acting as secondary nodes. Most contact
 output to the data ( .dat ) file, results
 ( .fil ) file, and the utility subroutine
 GETVRMAVGATNODE is
 associated with individual constraints. For contact output to the output database ( .odb ) file, some filtering is applied to
 reduce contact output noise. 
 Contact Pressure 
 The contact pressure distribution is of key interest in many
 Abaqus analyses. You can view the contact pressure on all contact surfaces except for
 analytical rigid surfaces and discrete rigid surfaces based on rigid-type elements (the
 latter restriction does not apply to general contact). You can view a contour plot of
 the contact pressure error indicator next to a contour plot of the contact pressure to
 gain perspective on local accuracy of the contact pressure solution in regions where the
 contact pressure solution is of interest 
 (see Selection of Error Indicators Influencing Adaptive Remeshing , for further discussion of error indicator output) . 
 In some cases you may observe the contact pressure extending
 beyond the actual contact zone due to the following factors: 
 The contour plots are constructed by interpolating nodal
 values, which can cause nonzero values to appear within portions of facets outside
 of the contact region. For example, this effect is often noticeable at corners, such
 as when two same-sized, aligned blocks are in contact—if the contact surfaces wrap
 around the corners, the contact pressure contours will extend slightly around the
 corners. 
 Abaqus/Standard outputs postprocessed contact stresses to the output database. During
 postprocessing, nodal contact stresses are calculated as weighted averages of values
 associated with active contact constraints in which the node participates. For
 example, a main node can participate in multiple constraints whose connectivities
 contain the node. Similarly, a secondary node can participate in multiple
 constraints from different formulations (such as surface-to-surface,
 edge-to-surface, and vertex-to-surface) at secondary node locations that are corners
 and edge features. 
 The weighting depends on the contact constraint area and a
 scaling factor based on the strength of the participation of the node in a
 constraint. The weighted averaging is intended to reduce contact stress noise.
 Modifications are made for calculating weightings, for example, at the corner nodes
 of quadratic faces (with zero consistent nodal areas) and main nodes that are
 outside the active contact region but participate in contact weakly through an
 active contact constraint. These modifications also have a filtering effect in terms
 of reducing contact stress values reported for nodes on the fringe of the active
 contact region. For such locations, contact nodal areas that are simply cumulative
 scaled constraint areas across constraints in which a node participates do not have
 much bearing on contact stress values. 
 In addition to averaging and filtering, contact stresses
 are also smoothed during the postprocessing operations. However, this filtering and
 subsequent smoothing are not "perfect" and can result in the contact zone size
 appearing somewhat exaggerated. Similarly, contact status output is also affected at
 nodes that lie on the fringe of the active contact region. In such cases, the
 contact status may be reported as closed at nodes in the exaggerated region even
 though it is open. 
 Due to these factors, trying to infer the contact force
 distribution from the contact stress distribution can be somewhat misleading. Instead,
 you can request nodal contact force output, which accurately represents the contact
 force distribution present in the analysis. 
 Contact Stresses due to Edge-to-Surface, Edge-to-Edge,
 and Vertex-to-Surface Interactions 
 For edge-to-surface contact and for edge-to-edge contact with
 the radial formulation where the active contact is along a line, the output variable CLINELOAD can be requested to the
 output database ( .odb ) in Abaqus/Standard . This contact load has units of force per length and is mesh independent. Contact
 stresses (in units of force per area) solely due to edge-to-surface contact ( CSTRESSETOS ) can be output for
 visualizing regions where the edge-to-surface constraints are active. The
 edge-to-surface formulation computes contact stresses in units of force per area by
 dividing contact force per edge length by a representative surface facet length. Since
 the contact area depends on the mesh size, edge-to-surface contact stresses are mesh
 dependent. For edge-to-edge contact using the cross product formulation where the active
 contact region is idealized as a point, the mesh-independent output variable CPOINTLOAD (with units of force)
 can be requested. 
 For vertex-to-surface contact, the mesh-independent output
 variable CPOINTLOAD (with units
 of force) can be requested to the output database ( .odb ) in Abaqus/Standard . 
 Contact stresses ( CSTRESS ) contain contributions from
 surface-to-surface, edge-to-surface, edge-to-edge, and vertex-to-surface constraints, if
 active. While accumulating contributions from edge-to-surface, edge-to-edge, and
 vertex-to-surface contact constraints, the constraint values are divided by either a
 representative surface facet length or its squared value to appropriately scale them to
 have units of force per area. 
 Edges and vertices represent a discontinuity in the surface
 smoothness, and the true contact stress solution near an edge or a vertex is commonly
 characterized by a strong gradient. Subsequently, error indicator output for contact
 stresses ( CSTRESSERI ) are
 typically quite high and acceptable for regions in which constraints involving edges and
 vertices are significant. 
 Whole Surface Variables 
 Whole surface variables are only marginally supported for general
 contact in Abaqus/Standard because these variable are associated with the overall general contact domain by
 default rather than individual surfaces associated with general contact. The only way to
 limit whole surface variables to be affected by a portion of the general contact domain is
 to specify a node set in the output request. Whole surface variables are computed as sums
 over all nodes (or optionally limited to a particular node set) of general contact while
 acting as secondary nodes. For example, CFN is the total force acting on
 secondary nodes due to contact pressure. CFN and other whole surface variables
 for general contact are typically of little utility, because contributions to the variable
 from different interactions within general contact will often cancel one another and the
 net result will typically depend on internal assignments of main and secondary roles. 
 Requesting Output 
 Certain contact variables must be requested as a group. For
 example, to output the clearance between surfaces ( COPEN ), you must request the variable
 CDISP (contact displacements).
 CDISP outputs both COPEN and CSLIP (tangential motion of the
 surfaces during contact). A complete listing of available contact variables and
 identifiers is given in Abaqus/Standard Output Variable Identifiers . 
 Output requests can be limited by specifying a node set
 containing a subset of the nodes acting as secondary nodes for some general contact
 interactions. Instructions on forming these output requests are available in the following
 sections: 
 To request output to the data ( .dat ) file, see Surface Output from Abaqus/Standard . 
 To request output to the output database ( .odb ) file, see Writing Surface Output to the Output Database . 
 Output of Tangential Results 
 Abaqus reports the values of tangential variables (frictional shear stress, viscous shear
 stress, and relative tangential motion) with respect to the local tangent directions
 defined on the surfaces. The local tangent directions CTANDIR1 and CTANDIR2 can be output by requesting
 the generic output variable CTANDIR . The definition of local tangent directions is explained in Local Tangent Directions on a Surface . These directions
 do not always correspond to the global coordinate system, and they rotate with the contact
 pair in a geometrically nonlinear analysis. 
 Abaqus/Standard calculates tangential results at each constraint point by taking the scalar product of
 the variable's vector and a local tangent direction, 
 t 
 1 
 or 
 t 
 2 
 , associated with the constraint point. The number at the end of a
 variable's name indicates whether the variable corresponds to the first or second local
 tangent direction. For example, CSHEAR1 is the frictional shear stress component in the first local tangent
 direction, while CSHEAR2 is the
 frictional shear stress component in the second local tangent direction. 
 Definition of Accumulated Incremental Relative Motion
 (Slip) 
 Abaqus/Standard defines the incremental relative motion (also known as slip) as the scalar product of
 the incremental relative nodal displacement vector and a local tangent direction. The
 incremental relative nodal displacement vector measures the motion of a secondary node
 relative to the motion of the main surface. The incremental slip is accumulated only
 when the secondary node is contacting the main surface. The sums of all such incremental
 slips during the analysis are reported as CSLIP1 and CSLIP2 . Details about the
 calculation of this quantity can be found in Small-sliding interaction between bodies , Finite-sliding interaction between deformable bodies , and Finite-sliding interaction between a deformable and a rigid body . 
 Output for Beams with Actual Beam Cross-Section
 Representation 
 When you enable actual beam cross-section representation for
 beams with noncircular cross-sections (see Contact Surface Representation for Beams ), Abaqus/Standard uses an automatically generated mesh of quadrilateral surface elements to represent the
 contact surface. Output variables associated with contact are available on the
 quadrilateral surface elements for postprocessing. They are not available on the
 corresponding beam elements. Output variables such as stress and strain at integration
 points are available on the beam elements rather than the surface elements. For an
 example, see Visualizing beam outputs with actual beam cross-section representation for contact . 
 Extending the Range for Which Contact Opening Output Is
 Provided for Gaps 
 To reduce computational costs, detailed computations to monitor
 potential points of interaction are avoided by default where surfaces are separated by a
 distance greater than the minimum gap distance at which contact forces (or thermal fluxes,
 etc.) may be transmitted. Therefore, contact opening ( COPEN ) output is typically not
 provided where surfaces are opened by more than a small amount compared to surface facet
 dimensions. You can extend the range for which Abaqus/Standard provides contact opening output; COPEN will be provided up to gap distances equal to a specified “tracking
 thickness.” Using this control may increase computational cost due to extra contact
 tracking computations, especially if you specify a large tracking thickness value. 
 Input File Usage 
 SURFACE INTERACTION , TRACKING THICKNESS = value 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage 
 You cannot adjust the default tracking thickness
 in Abaqus/CAE . 
 Whole Model Contact-Related Energy Variables 
 The contact-related energy variables, shown in Table 1 , are available in Abaqus/Standard (see Abaqus/Standard Output Variable Identifiers ). An example of
 using the contact-related energies is provided in Energy computations in a contact analysis . 
 Table 1. Contact-related energy output variables. 
 Description 
 Output
 variable 
 Frictional dissipation 
 ALLFD 
 Elastic
 contact energy 
 Energy stored among all
 penalty springs and “softened” contact constraints associated with normal contact
 constraints 
 ALLCCEN 
 Energy stored among all
 penalty springs associated with tangential contact constraints 
 ALLCCET 
 Energy stored among all
 penalty springs and “softened” contact constraints associated with normal and
 tangential contact constraints (equal to the sum of ALLCCEN and ALLCCET ) 
 ALLCCE 
 Energy
 dissipation associated with contact stabilization and contact damping 
 Normal contact direction
 for the whole model 
 ALLCCSDN 
 Tangential contact
 direction for the whole model 
 ALLCCSDT 
 Whole model (equal to the
 sum of ALLCCSDN and ALLCCSDT ) 
 ALLCCSD 
 Energy associated with
 contact constraint “discontinuity work” 
 Accounts for the portion of
 the work done by contact forces when contact conditions change that is not
 accounted for by other contact energy variables 
 ALLCCDW 
 The output variables ALLSD and ALLVD also account for dissipative
 energies associated with contact stabilization and contact damping. 
 The elastic contact energies and dissipative energies associated
 with contact stabilization and contact damping are associated with numerical effects that
 would be zero in idealized situations, such as infinite penalty stiffness or zero
 stabilization stiffness. Significant values of these output variables compared to other
 physically based energies in a model, such as internal energy ( ALLIE ), are sometimes indicative of
 solution inaccuracy. The contact constraint discontinuity work will tend to zero as the
 time increment size becomes very small. However, as discussed in Energy computations in a contact analysis , it is quite
 common for ALLCCDW to have a
 significant value without causing solution inaccuracy. 
 The modified external work ( ALLWK + ALLCCDW ) is often representative of
 the physical external work in contact problems in terms of being equal to the sum of the
 stored and dissipated energies (see Energy computations in a contact analysis ). Consider a
 particular contact constraint having a gap distance, 
 g 
 i 
 , in one increment and becoming closed with contact force,
 f 
 i 
 + 
 1 
 , in the next increment (see Figure 13 ). A trapezoidal rule for integrating the work done by the contact force multiplies the
 average force by the relative incremental motion. In this case, the resulting contribution
 to ALLCCDW is negative
 1 
 / 
 2 
 ∗ 
 g 
 i 
 ∗ 
 f 
 i 
 + 
 1 
 . This energy contribution is nonphysical and would disappear in the
 numerics as the time increment tends to zero. When contact opens up, similar behavior
 happens with sign reversals. Numerical integration for ALLWK is also limited with respect to
 accounting accurately for sudden changes in external forces. Summing ALLWK and ALLCCDW often cancels the respective
 nonphysical energy contributions, and the net effect on the total energy balance ETOTAL is zero. 
 Figure 13. One contact point example to illustrate contributions
 to ALLCCDW .