About Contact Pairs in Abaqus/Standard 
 About Contact Pairs in Abaqus/Standard 
 Contact pairs in Abaqus/Standard : 
 can be used to define interactions between bodies in mechanical,
 coupled temperature-displacement, coupled thermal-electrical-structural, coupled pore
 pressure-displacement, coupled thermal-electrical, and heat transfer simulations; 
 are part of the model definition; 
 can be formed using a pair of rigid or deformable surfaces or a
 single deformable surface; 
 do not have to use surfaces with matching meshes; 
 cannot be formed with one two-dimensional surface and one
 three-dimensional surface; and 
 cannot be formed with cracked surfaces for enriched elements. 
 You can define contact in Abaqus/Standard in terms of two surfaces that may interact with each other as a “contact pair” or in terms
 of a single surface that may interact with itself in “self-contact.” Abaqus/Standard enforces contact conditions by forming equations involving groups of nearby nodes from the
 respective surfaces or, in the case of self-contact, from separate regions of the same
 surface. This section describes various aspects of defining contact pairs and refers to other
 sections for additional details. 
 This page discusses: Defining Contact Pairs Selecting Surfaces Used in Contact Pairs Removing and Reactivating Contact Pairs Output 
 See Also About Contact Interactions Contact Property Models In Other Guides Element-Based Surface Definition Node-Based Surface Definition Analytical Rigid Surface Definition *CONTACT PAIR *SURFACE *MODEL CHANGE Defining surface-to-surface contact Defining self-contact Using contact and constraint detection 
 Products 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 Abaqus/CAE 
 Defining Contact Pairs 
 To define a contact pair, you must indicate which pairs of surfaces
 may interact with one another or which surfaces may interact with themselves. Contact
 surfaces should extend far enough to include all regions that may come into contact during
 an analysis; however, including additional surface nodes and faces that never experience
 contact may result in significant extra computational cost (for example, extending a
 secondary surface such that it includes many nodes that remain separated from the main
 surface throughout an analysis can significantly increase memory usage unless penalty
 contact enforcement is used). 
 Every contact pair is assigned a contact formulation (either
 explicitly or by default) and must refer to an interaction property. Discussion of the
 various available contact formulations (based on whether the tracking approach assumes
 finite- or small-sliding—and whether the contact discretization is based on a
 node-to-surface or surface-to-surface approach) is provided in Contact Formulations in Abaqus/Standard . Interaction property
 definitions are discussed in Assigning Contact Properties for Contact Pairs in Abaqus/Standard . 
 Defining Contact between Two Separate Surfaces 
 When a contact pair contains two surfaces, the two surfaces are
 not allowed to include any of the same nodes and you must choose which surface will be the
 secondary and which will be the main. The selection of main and secondary surfaces is
 discussed in detail in Choosing the Main and Secondary Surface Roles in a Two-Surface Contact Pair . For simple
 contact pairs consisting of two deformable surfaces, the following basic guidelines can be
 used: 
 The larger of the two surfaces should act as the main
 surface. 
 If the surfaces are of comparable size, the surface on the
 stiffer body should act as the main surface. 
 If the surfaces are of comparable size and stiffness, the
 surface with the coarser mesh should act as the main surface. 
 The finite-sliding, node-to-surface formulation is used by
 default (except in Abaqus/CAE , where the default is the finite-sliding, surface-to-surface formulation) . 
 Defining Contact Pairs Using the Finite-Sliding,
 Node-to-Surface Formulation 
 A finite-sliding, node-to-surface formulation is available. 
 Input File Usage 
 CONTACT PAIR , INTERACTION = interaction_property_name 
 secondary_surface_name , main_surface_name 
 You can also specify the contact
 discretization directly: 
 CONTACT PAIR , INTERACTION = interaction_property_name , 
 TYPE = NODE TO SURFACE 
 secondary_surface_name , main_surface_name 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage 
 Interaction module: Create Interaction : Surface-to-surface contact (Standard) : select the main surface, click Surface or Node Region , select the secondary surface, 
Interaction editor, Sliding formulation: Finite sliding , Discretization method: Node to surface , Contact interaction property : interaction_property_name 
 Defining Contact Pairs Using the Finite-Sliding,
 Surface-to-Surface Formulation 
 A node-based secondary surface precludes the use of
 surface-to-surface discretization. Some contact capabilities are not available with the
 finite-sliding, surface-to-surface formulation, including crack propagation (see Crack Propagation Analysis ). 
 Input File Usage 
 Use the following option to define contact
 constraints using the finite-sliding, surface-to-surface formulation: 
 CONTACT PAIR , INTERACTION = interaction_property_name , 
 TYPE = SURFACE TO SURFACE 
 secondary_surface_name , main_surface_name 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage 
 Interaction module: Create Interaction : Surface-to-surface contact (Standard) : select the main surface, click Surface , select the secondary surface, 
Interaction editor, Sliding formulation: Finite sliding , Discretization method: Surface to surface , Contact interaction property : interaction_property_name 
 Defining Contact Pairs Using the Small-Sliding,
 Node-to-Surface Formulation 
 The small-sliding tracking approach uses node-to-surface
 discretization by default. For an explanation of when the small-sliding tracking
 approach is appropriate in an analysis, see Using the Small-Sliding Tracking Approach . 
 Input File Usage 
 CONTACT PAIR , INTERACTION = interaction_property_name , 
 SMALL SLIDING 
 secondary_surface_name , main_surface_name 
 You can also specify the contact
 discretization directly: 
 CONTACT PAIR , INTERACTION = interaction_property_name , 
 SMALL SLIDING , TYPE = NODE TO SURFACE 
 secondary_surface_name , main_surface_name 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage 
 Interaction module: Create Interaction : Surface-to-surface contact (Standard) : select the main surface, click Surface or Node Region , select the secondary surface, 
Interaction editor, Sliding formulation: Small sliding , Discretization method: Node to surface , Contact interaction property : interaction_property_name 
 Defining Contact Pairs Using the Small-Sliding,
 Surface-to-Surface Formulation 
 A node-based secondary surface precludes the use of
 surface-to-surface discretization. 
 Input File Usage 
 CONTACT PAIR , INTERACTION = interaction_property_name , 
 SMALL SLIDING , TYPE = SURFACE TO SURFACE 
 secondary_surface_name , main_surface_name 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage 
 Interaction module: Create Interaction : Surface-to-surface contact (Standard) : select the main surface, click Surface , select the secondary surface, 
Interaction editor, Sliding formulation: Small sliding , Discretization method: Surface to surface , Contact interaction property : interaction_property_name 
 Using Symmetric Main-Secondary Contact Pairs to Improve
 Contact Modeling 
 For node-to-surface contact it is possible for main surface nodes
 to penetrate the secondary surface without resistance with the strict main-secondary
 algorithm used by Abaqus/Standard . This penetration tends to occur if the main surface is more refined than the secondary
 surface or a large contact pressure develops between soft bodies. Refining the secondary
 surface mesh often minimizes the penetration of the main surface nodes. If the refinement
 technique does not work or is not practical, a symmetric main-secondary method can be used
 if both surfaces are element-based surfaces with deformable or deformable-made-rigid
 parent elements. To use this method, define two contact pairs using the same two surfaces,
 but switch the roles of main and secondary surface for the two contact pairs. This method
 causes Abaqus/Standard to treat each surface as a main surface and, thus, involves additional computational
 expense because contact searches must be conducted twice for the same contact pair. The
 increased accuracy provided by this method must be compared to the additional
 computational cost. 
 All of the contact formulations are available for symmetric
 main-secondary contact pairs, and can be applied using the same options discussed above. 
 Input File Usage 
 CONTACT PAIR , INTERACTION = interaction_property_name 
 surface_1 , surface_2 
 surface_2 , surface_1 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage 
 Interaction module: Create Interaction : Surface-to-surface 
 contact (Standard) : select the main surface, click Surface , select the secondary surface
Copy this interaction to a new interaction, and edit the new interaction. In the interaction editor, click Switch to reverse the main and secondary surfaces. 
 Limitations of Symmetric Main-Secondary Contact
 Pairs 
 Using symmetric main-secondary contact pairs can lead to
 overconstraint problems when very stiff or hard contact conditions are enforced.
 See Contact Constraint Enforcement Methods in Abaqus/Standard for a
 discussion of overconstraints and alternate constraint enforcement methods. 
 For softened contact conditions, use of symmetric
 main-secondary contact pairs will cause deviations from the specified
 pressure-versus-overclosure behavior, because both contact pairs contribute to the
 overall interface stress without accounting for one another. For example, symmetric
 main-secondary contact pairs effectively double the overall contact stiffness if a
 linear pressure-overclosure relationship is specified. 
 Likewise, use of symmetric main-secondary contact pairs will
 cause deviations from the friction model if an optional shear stress limit is specified
 (see Using the Optional Shear Stress Limit ), because the contact stresses
 observed by each contact pair will be approximately one-half of the total interface
 stress. 
 Similarly, it can be difficult to interpret the results at the
 interface for symmetric main-secondary contact pairs. In this case both surfaces at the
 interface act as secondary surfaces, so each has contact constraint values associated
 with it. The constraint values that represent contact pressures are not independent of
 each other. Therefore, the constraint values reported in the data ( .dat ) and results ( .fil ) files represent only a part of the
 total interface pressure and have to be summed to obtain the total. 
 In the output database, mechanical contact variables are
 reported at the nodes on both the main and secondary surfaces per contact pair and not
 just the secondary surface where constraints are formed. Consequently, two result sets
 are available per surface of a symmetric main-secondary contact pair; once when a
 surface acts as a secondary and once as a main. For nodal contact pressures the Visualization module of Abaqus/CAE only reports the maximum of the two pressure values associated with a node when the
 surface containing the node acts either as a main or as a secondary surface. Even in
 this case, the contact pressures do not represent the true interface pressure. 
 Apart from contact pressures, some contact output may be
 confusing with symmetric main-secondary contact pairs. For example, Abaqus/Standard may report a positive opening distance on one side of a contact interface but zero
 opening distance (i.e., touching) on the opposite side of the interface. Typically this
 is caused by the shape or relative mesh refinement of the two surfaces. 
 Defining Self-Contact 
 Define contact between a single surface and itself by specifying
 only a single surface or by specifying the same surface twice. The small-sliding tracking
 approach cannot be used with self-contact. 
 Defining Self-Contact Using Node-to-Surface
 Discretization 
 Abaqus/Standard uses node-to-surface contact discretization by default for self-contact. 
 Input File Usage 
 Use either of the following options: 
 CONTACT PAIR , INTERACTION = interaction_property_name 
 surface_1, 
 CONTACT PAIR , INTERACTION = interaction_property_name 
 surface_1 , surface_1 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage 
 Interaction module: Create Interaction : 
 Self-contact (Standard) : select the surface
Interaction editor, Discretization method: Node to surface , Contact interaction property : interaction_property_name 
 or 
 Interaction module: Create Interaction : Surface-to-surface contact (Standard) : select the surface, click Surface , select the surface again
Interaction editor, Sliding formulation: Finite sliding , Discretization method: Node to surface , Contact interaction property : interaction_property_name 
 Defining Self-Contact Using Surface-to-Surface
 Discretization 
 Surface-to-surface discretization often leads to more accurate
 modeling of self-contact simulations. However, because the self-contact surface is
 acting as both a main and a secondary, surface-to-surface discretization can sometimes
 significantly increase the solution cost. 
 Input File Usage 
 Use either of the following options: 
 CONTACT PAIR , INTERACTION = interaction_property_name , 
 TYPE = SURFACE TO SURFACE 
 surface_1, 
 CONTACT PAIR , INTERACTION = interaction_property_name , 
 TYPE = SURFACE TO SURFACE 
 surface_1 , surface_1 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage 
 Interaction module: Create Interaction : 
 Self-contact (Standard) : select the surface
Interaction editor, Discretization method: Surface to surface , Contact interaction property : interaction_property_name 
 or 
 Interaction module: Create Interaction : Surface-to-surface contact (Standard) : select the surface, click Surface , select the surface again
Interaction editor, Sliding formulation: Finite sliding , Discretization method: Surface to surface , Contact interaction property : interaction_property_name 
 Limitations of Self-Contact 
 Self-contact is valid only for mechanical surface interactions
 and is limited to finite sliding with element-based surfaces. 
 A node of a self-contact surface can be both a secondary node
 and a member of the main surface for two-dimensional self-contact using the
 surface-to-surface formulation and for all three-dimensional self-contact. In these
 cases the contact behavior is similar to symmetric main-secondary contact pairs, and the
 issues discussed in Using Symmetric Main-Secondary Contact Pairs to Improve Contact Modeling apply. Abaqus/Standard automatically applies some numerical softening to contact conditions in these cases, as discussed in Contact Constraint Enforcement Methods in Abaqus/Standard . 
 Direct enforcement of hard contact conditions is the default
 constraint enforcement method for two-dimensional self-contact using the node-to-surface
 formulation. In this case, each node adjacent to a vertex where a two-dimensional
 surface folds onto itself is automatically assigned a secondary or main role during the
 analysis. Since contact constraints directly resist penetrations at nodes that act as
 secondary nodes, there is some possibility of unresolved penetrations at nodes that only
 act as main nodes for two-dimensional self-contact using the node-to-surface
 formulation. 
 Selecting Surfaces Used in Contact Pairs 
 Methods for creating surfaces are discussed in Element-Based Surface Definition , Node-Based Surface Definition , and Analytical Rigid Surface Definition ; those sections
 discuss general restrictions for the various surface types. Considerations related to
 surface characteristics for various contact formulations are discussed in Contact Formulations in Abaqus/Standard . Additional considerations
 for surfaces used in contact definitions are discussed below. 
 Orientation Considerations for Shell-Like Surfaces 
 Abaqus/Standard requires main contact surfaces to be single-sided for node-to-surface contact and for
 some surface-to-surface contact formulations (see Fundamental Choices Affecting the Contact Formulation for details).
 This requires that you consider the proper orientation for main surfaces defined on
 elements, such as shells and membranes, that have positive and negative directions. For
 node-to-surface contact the orientation of secondary surface normals is irrelevant, but
 for surface-to-surface contact the orientation of single-sided secondary surfaces is taken
 into consideration. 
 Double-sided element-based surfaces are allowed for the default
 surface-to-surface contact formulations, although they are not always appropriate for
 cases with deep initial penetrations. If the main and secondary surfaces are both
 double-sided, the positive or negative orientation of the contact normal direction will be
 chosen such as to minimize (or avoid) penetrations for each contact constraint. If either
 or both of the surfaces are single-sided, the positive or negative orientation of the
 contact normal direction will be determined from the single-sided surface normals rather
 than the relative positions of the surfaces. 
 When the orientation of a contact surface is relevant to the
 contact formulation, you must consider the following aspects for surfaces on structural
 (beam and shell), membrane, truss, or rigid elements: 
 Adjacent surface faces must have consistent normal
 directions. Abaqus/Standard will issue an error message if adjacent surface faces have inconsistent normals on
 a single-sided surface whose orientation is relevant to the contact formulation. 
 Except for initial interference fit problems (see Modeling Contact Interference Fits in Abaqus/Standard ), the secondary
 surface should be on the same side of the main surface as the outward normal. If, in
 the initial configuration, the secondary surface is on the opposite side of the main
 surface as the outward normal, Abaqus/Standard will detect overclosure of the surfaces and may have difficulty finding an initial
 solution if the overclosure is severe. An improper specification of the outward normal
 will often cause an analysis to immediately fail to converge. Figure 1 illustrates the proper and improper specification of a main surface's outward
 normal. 
 Figure 1. Example of proper and improper main surface
 orientation. 
 Contact will be ignored with surface-to-surface
 discretization if single-sided secondary and main surfaces have normal directions that
 are in approximately the same direction (for example, contact will not be enforced if
 the dot product of the secondary and main surface normals is positive). 
 The following output from a data check analysis (see Abaqus/Standard and Abaqus/Explicit Execution ) can be useful
 in identifying incorrectly oriented main surfaces: 
 Initial clearances can be displayed in Abaqus/CAE with a contour plot of the variable COPEN at increment 0 of the first
 step; initial overclosures correspond to negative clearances. 
 Abaqus/Standard provides a detailed printout of the model's initial contact state. 
 Surface Connectivity Restrictions 
 Certain connectivity restrictions apply to contact surfaces
 depending on the type of contact formulation. Surface connectivity restrictions for the
 various contact formulations are summarized in Table 1 . As indicated in this table, the connectivity restrictions are sometimes different for
 main and secondary surfaces. Self-contact surfaces act as both main and secondary
 surfaces; therefore, if a restriction applies to either a main or secondary surface, it
 also applies to self-contact. The potential connectivity restrictions referred to in Table 1 are described below: 
 Table 1. Summary of which connectivity characteristics of
 element-based surfaces are allowed for various contact formulations. 
 Contact formulation 
 Connectivity characteristics 
 Discontinuous (or 3D faces joined at only one node) 
 T-intersection
 Finite-sliding,
 node-to-surface  
 Main: Not allowed Secondary: Allowed 
 Main: Not allowed Secondary: Allowed 
 Small-sliding,
 node-to-surface 
 Main: Allowed Secondary: Allowed 
 Main: Not allowed Secondary: Allowed 
 Finite-sliding,
 surface-to-surface 
 Main: Allowed Secondary: Allowed 
 Main: Allowed Secondary: Allowed 
 Small-sliding,
 surface-to-surface 
 Main: Allowed Secondary: Allowed 
 Main: Allowed Secondary: Allowed 
 Discontinuous surfaces: Discontinuous contact surfaces are
 allowed in many cases, but the main surface for finite-sliding, node-to-surface
 contact cannot be made up of two or more disconnected regions (they must be continuous
 across element edges in three-dimensional models or across nodes in two-dimensional
 models). Figure 2 shows examples of continuous surfaces, whereas Figure 3 and Figure 4 show examples of discontinuous surfaces. Figure 5 shows an automatically generated free surface resulting from the specification of
 an element set consisting of two disjointed groups of elements. The resulting surface
 is not continuous since it is composed of two disjoint open curves, so this surface
 would be invalid as a main surface for finite-sliding, node-to-surface contact. 
 Figure 2. Examples of continuous surfaces. 
 Figure 3. Example of a discontinuous 2D surface. 
 Figure 4. Example of a discontinuous 3D surface. 
 Figure 5. Example of a discontinuous surface resulting from
 automatic free surface generation with a disjoint element set. 
 Portions of three-dimensional surfaces joined at only one
 node: The finite-sliding, node-to-surface contact formulation also does not allow
 three-dimensional main surface faces to be joined at a single node (they must be
 joined across a common element edge). Figure 6 shows an example of a surface with two faces connected by a single node. 
 Figure 6. Example of a 3D surface with two faces sharing a
 single node. 
 Surfaces with T-intersections: In some cases a contact
 surface cannot have more than two surface faces sharing a common main node in two
 dimensions or a common main edge in three dimensions. For example, Figure 7 shows examples of surfaces with T-intersections, in which three faces share a
 common node in two dimensions or a common edge in three dimensions. While more than
 two surface faces can share a common secondary node in two dimensions or a common edge
 in three dimensions for node-to-surface formulations, the secondary faces must be
 single-sided, which precludes the most common T-intersection cases for node-to-surface
 formulations. 
 Figure 7. Examples of surfaces with T-intersections. 
 Analytical Rigid Surfaces 
 Analytical rigid surfaces are often effective for efficiently
 modeling curved, rigid geometries, as discussed in Analytical Rigid Surface Definition . For rare cases
 in which a very large number (thousands) of segments would be necessary to define an
 analytical rigid surface, better performance can be achieved with an element-based rigid
 surface (see Element-Based Surface Definition ). 
 Three-Dimensional Beam and Truss Surfaces 
 Abaqus/Standard cannot use three-dimensional beams or trusses to form a main surface because the
 elements do not have enough information to create unique surface normals. However, these
 elements can be used to define a secondary surface. Two-dimensional beams and trusses can
 be used to form both main and secondary surfaces. 
 Beam section offsets, specified either as part of the beam cross
 section definition or through the BEAM SECTION OFFSET 
 option, are neglected for contact interactions in Abaqus/Standard . 
 Edge-Based Surfaces 
 Edge-based surfaces ( Element-Based Surface Definition ) on
 three-dimensional shell elements cannot be used in a contact analysis in Abaqus/Standard . 
 Limitations of Node-Based Surfaces 
 Use node-based surfaces with caution when the contact property
 definition includes user-defined softened contact properties or thermal or electrical
 interactions because the contact constitutive behavior (which relies on accurate
 calculation of contact pressure, heat flux, or electric current) will not be enforced
 correctly unless the precise surface area is associated with each node. For details, see
 Contact Pressure-Overclosure Relationships , Thermal Contact Properties , or Electrical Contact Properties . 
 Removing and Reactivating Contact Pairs 
 You can temporarily remove contact pairs from a simulation, which
 may result in significant computational savings by eliminating unnecessary contact searches
 and updates of surface orientations during the simulation. Removal and reactivation of
 contact pairs is commonly used in complicated forming processes where multiple tools need to
 interact with the workpiece at different stages in the analysis. Step-dependent activation
 and deactivation are also supported for general contact when used as an alternative to
 contact pairs for modeling contact (see Deactivating and Reactivating Contact Interactions across Steps ). 
 You cannot remove tied contact pairs from a simulation (see Defining Tied Contact in Abaqus/Standard ). 
 Removing Contact Pairs 
 Removal of contact pairs is a useful technique for uncoupling
 components of an assembly until they should be brought together (such as tooling in
 manufacturing process simulations). Significant computational expense might be saved by
 removing a contact pair and introducing it at the proper time, thus eliminating the need
 to monitor the contact conditions except when they are relevant. 
 Input File Usage 
 MODEL CHANGE , TYPE = CONTACT PAIR , REMOVE 
 secondary_surface, main_surface 
 Repeat the data line as needed. 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage 
 Use one of the following options: 
 Interaction module: Create Interaction : surface-to-surface contact or self-contact interaction editor: toggle off Active in this step 
 Interaction module: interaction manager: select interaction, Deactivate 
 Removal of Contact Forces Associated with Closed
 Contact Pairs 
 If the surfaces are in contact when a contact pair is removed,
 Abaqus/Standard stores the corresponding contact forces (or heat fluxes if thermal interactions are
 present, or electrical currents if it is a coupled-thermal electrical analysis) for
 every node on each surface. Abaqus/Standard automatically ramps these forces (or heat fluxes or electrical currents) linearly
 down to zero magnitude during the removal step. Abaqus/Standard always removes the contact constraints for mechanical surface interactions
 instantaneously. 
 Care must be taken in removing contact pairs in transient
 procedures. In transient heat transfer, fully coupled temperature-displacement, or fully
 coupled thermal-electrical-structural analysis if the fluxes are high and the step is
 long, this ramping down may have the effect of cooling down or heating up the rest of
 the body. In dynamic analysis if the forces are high and the step is long, kinetic
 energy can be imparted to the remaining portion of the model. This problem can be
 avoided by removing the contact pairs in a very short transient step prior to the rest
 of the analysis. This step can be done in a single increment. 
 Using an Allowable Contact Interference to Deactivate
 Contact Pairs 
 A contact pair with mechanical contact interactions can be
 deactivated during an analysis by assigning a very large allowable contact interference
 to the contact pairs (see Modeling Contact Interference Fits in Abaqus/Standard ). This method has the disadvantage of not
 reducing the computational cost of the analysis because the contact algorithm will still
 calculate the contact conditions for the contact pair in each increment. 
 Reactivating Contact Pairs 
 All contact pairs that will be used in a simulation must be
 created at the start of the analysis; they cannot be created once the simulation has
 begun. However, contact pairs can be created, removed at the start of the analysis in the
 first step, and then reactivated at a later point during the simulation. 
 In Abaqus/CAE you can create contact pairs in any step. If a contact pair is created in a step other
 than the initial step, Abaqus/CAE automatically deactivates the contact pair in the initial step and reactivates it in
 the step in which you created it. 
 Input File Usage 
 MODEL CHANGE , TYPE = CONTACT PAIR , ADD 
 secondary_surface, main_surface 
 Repeat the data line as needed. 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage 
 Interaction module: Create Interaction : surface-to-surface contact or self-contact interaction editor: toggle on Active in this step 
 Reactivating Overclosed Contact Pairs 
 When a contact pair is reactivated, the contact constraint
 becomes active immediately. In mechanical simulations it is possible for the surfaces of
 a contact pair to move such that they become overclosed while the contact pair is
 inactive. If this overclosure is too severe when the contact pair is reactivated, Abaqus/Standard may encounter convergence problems as it tries to enforce the suddenly activated
 contact constraint. To avoid such problems, you can specify a permissible interference
 value, v , for the contact pair that
 is larger than the overclosure for the contact pair. Abaqus/Standard will ramp v down to zero during
 the step. For details on specifying allowable interferences, see Modeling Contact Interference Fits in Abaqus/Standard . 
 Output 
 Output variables associated with the interaction of contact pairs
 fall into two categories: nodal variables (sometimes called constraint variables) and whole
 surface variables. In addition, Abaqus outputs an array of diagnostic information associated with contact interactions, as
 discussed in Contact Diagnostics in an Abaqus/Standard Analysis . 
 For more detailed discussions of
 variables associated with thermal, electrical, and pore fluid analyses, see the sections on
 the related contact properties in Contact Property Models . 
 Nodal Contact Variables 
 Nodal contact
 variables can be contoured on contact surfaces in the Visualization module of Abaqus/CAE . Nodal contact variables include contact pressure and force, frictional shear
 stress and force, relative tangential motion (slip) of the surfaces during contact,
 clearance between surfaces, heat or fluid flux per unit area, fluid pressure, and
 electrical current per unit area. Many of the nodal contact variables written to the
 output database ( .odb ) file are often
 available for all contact nodes, regardless of whether they act as secondary or main
 nodes. Other nodal contact variables are available only at nodes acting as secondary
 nodes. Most contact output to the data ( .dat ) file, results ( .fil ) file,
 and the utility subroutine GETVRMAVGATNODE is associated with individual constraints. For contact output
 to the output database ( .odb ) file, some
 filtering is applied to reduce contact output noise. 
 The contact pressure distribution is of key interest in many Abaqus analyses. You can view the contact pressure on all contact surfaces except for
 analytical rigid surfaces and discrete rigid surfaces based on rigid-type elements (the
 latter restriction does not apply to general contact). You can view a contour plot of the
 contact pressure error indicator next to a contour plot of the contact pressure to gain
 perspective on local accuracy of the contact pressure solution in regions where the
 contact pressure solution is of interest 
 (see Selection of Error Indicators Influencing Adaptive Remeshing for further discussion of error indicator output) . 
 In some cases you may observe the contact pressure extending
 beyond the actual contact zone due to the following factors: 
 The contour plots are constructed by interpolating nodal
 values, which can cause nonzero values to appear within portions of facets outside of
 the contact region. For example, this effect is often noticeable at corners, such as
 when two same-sized, aligned blocks are in contact—if the contact surfaces wrap around
 the corners, the contact pressure contours will extend slightly around the corners.
 Abaqus/Standard outputs postprocessed contact stresses to the output database. During
 postprocessing, nodal contact stresses are calculated as weighted averages of values
 associated with active contact constraints in which the node participates. For
 example, a main node can participate in multiple constraints whose connectivities
 contain the node. Similarly, a secondary node can participate in multiple constraints,
 as in the case of the finite sliding surface-to-surface formulation when more than one
 constraint is created at secondary node locations that are corners and edge features. 
 The weighting depends on the contact constraint area and a
 scaling factor based on the strength of the participation of the node in a constraint.
 The weighted averaging is intended to reduce contact stress noise. Modifications are
 made for calculating weightings, for example, at the corner nodes of quadratic faces
 (with zero consistent nodal areas) and main nodes that are outside the active contact
 region but participate in contact weakly through an active contact constraint. These
 modifications also have a filtering effect in terms of reducing contact stress values
 reported for nodes on the fringe of the active contact region. For such locations,
 contact nodal areas that are simply cumulative scaled constraint areas across
 constraints in which a node participates do not have much bearing on contact stress
 values. 
 In addition to averaging and filtering, contact stresses are
 also smoothed during the postprocessing operations. However, this filtering and
 subsequent smoothing are not "perfect" and can result in the contact zone size
 appearing somewhat exaggerated. Similarly, contact status output is also affected at
 nodes that lie on the fringe of the active contact region. In such cases, the contact
 status may be reported as closed at nodes in the exaggerated region even though it is
 open. 
 Due to these factors, trying to infer the contact force
 distribution from the contact stress distribution can be somewhat misleading. Instead, you
 can request nodal contact force output, which accurately represents the contact force
 distribution present in the analysis. 
 Whole Surface Variables 
 Whole surface variables are attributes of an entire secondary
 surface. Available as history output, these variables record the total force and moment
 due to contact pressure and frictional stress, the center of pressure and frictional
 stress (defined as the point closest to the centroid of the surface that lies on the line
 of action of the resultant force for which the resultant moment is minimal), and the total
 contact area (defined as the sum of all the facets where there is contact force). The last
 letter of each variable name (except the variable CAREA ) denotes which contact force
 distribution on the surface is used to calculate the resultant: 
 N 
 Normal contact forces are used to derive the resultant
 quantity. 
 S 
 Shear contact forces are used to derive the resultant
 quantity. 
 T 
 The sum of the normal and shear contact forces is used to
 derive the resultant quantity. 
 For example, CFN is the total force due to contact pressure, CFS is the total force due to
 frictional stress, and CFT is the
 total force due to both contact pressure and frictional stress. 
 Each total moment output variable will not necessarily equal the
 cross product of the respective center of force vector and resultant force vector. Forces
 acting on two different nodes of a surface may have components acting in opposite
 directions, such that these nodal force components generate a net moment but not a net
 force; therefore, the total moment may not arise entirely from the resultant force. The
 center of force output variables tend to be most meaningful when the surface nodal forces
 act in approximately the same direction. 
 Requesting Output 
 Certain contact variables must be requested as a group. For
 example, to output the clearance between surfaces ( COPEN ), you must request the variable
 CDISP (contact displacements).
 CDISP outputs both COPEN and CSLIP (tangential motion of the
 surfaces during contact). A complete listing of available contact pair variables and
 identifiers is given in Abaqus/Standard Output Variable Identifiers . 
 Output requests can be limited to individual contact pairs or
 portions of a secondary surface. You can: 
 request output associated with a given contact pair; 
 request output associated with a given secondary surface,
 including contributions from all of the contact pairs to which the secondary surface
 belongs; and 
 limit the output by specifying a node set containing a subset
 of the nodes on the secondary surface. 
 Instructions on forming these output requests are available in
 the following sections: 
 To request output to the data ( .dat ) file, see Surface Output from Abaqus/Standard . 
 To request output to the output database ( .odb ) file, see Writing Surface Output to the Output Database . 
 Differences for Small-Sliding and Finite-Sliding
 Contact 
 For small-sliding contact problems the contact area is calculated
 in the input file preprocessor from the undeformed shape of the model; thus, it does not
 change throughout the analysis, and contact pressures for small-sliding contact are
 calculated according to this invariant contact area. This behavior is different from that
 in finite-sliding contact problems, where the contact area and contact pressures are
 calculated according to the deformed shape of the model. 
 Output of Tangential Results 
 Abaqus reports the values of tangential variables (frictional shear stress, viscous shear
 stress, and relative tangential motion) with respect to the local tangent directions
 defined on the surfaces. The local tangent directions CTANDIR1 and CTANDIR2 can be output by requesting
 the generic output variable CTANDIR . The definition of local tangent directions is explained in Local Tangent Directions on a Surface . These directions
 do not always correspond to the global coordinate system, and they rotate with the contact
 pair in a geometrically nonlinear analysis. 
 Abaqus/Standard calculates tangential results at each constraint point by taking the scalar product of
 the variable's vector and a local tangent direction, 
 t 
 1 
 or 
 t 
 2 
 , associated with the constraint point. The number at the end of a
 variable's name indicates whether the variable corresponds to the first or second local
 tangent direction. For example, CSHEAR1 is the frictional shear stress component in the first local tangent
 direction, while CSHEAR2 is the
 frictional shear stress component in the second local tangent direction. 
 Definition of Accumulated Incremental Relative Motion
 (Slip) 
 Abaqus/Standard defines the incremental relative motion (also known as slip) as the scalar product of
 the incremental relative nodal displacement vector and a local tangent direction. The
 incremental relative nodal displacement vector measures the motion of a secondary node
 relative to the motion of the main surface. The incremental slip is accumulated only
 when the secondary node is contacting the main surface. The sums of all such incremental
 slips during the analysis are reported as CSLIP1 and CSLIP2 . Details about the
 calculation of this quantity can be found in Small-sliding interaction between bodies , Finite-sliding interaction between deformable bodies , and Finite-sliding interaction between a deformable and a rigid body . 
 Extending the Range for Which Contact Opening Output Is
 Provided for Gaps 
 To reduce computational costs, detailed computations to monitor
 potential points of interaction are avoided by default where surfaces are separated by a
 distance greater than the minimum gap distance at which contact forces (or thermal fluxes,
 etc.) may be transmitted. Therefore, contact opening ( COPEN ) output is typically not
 provided for finite-sliding contact where surfaces are opened by more than a small amount
 compared to surface facet dimensions. You can extend the range in which Abaqus/Standard provides contact opening output; COPEN will be provided up to gap distances equal to a specified “tracking
 thickness.” Using this control may increase computational cost due to extra contact
 tracking computations, especially if you specify a large tracking thickness value. 
 Input File Usage 
 SURFACE INTERACTION , TRACKING THICKNESS = value 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage 
 Interaction module: contact property editor: Mechanical Geometric Properties : toggle on Thickness to determine the contacting surfaces to be tracked: value 
 Output for Axisymmetric Models 
 In an axisymmetric analysis the total forces and moments
 transmitted between the contacting bodies as a result of contact pressure and frictional
 stress are computed in the same manner as in a two-dimensional analysis. Therefore, the
 component of the total forces along the r -axis is nonzero, and the components of the total moments include contributions
 from the total forces along the r -axis. 
 Obtaining the “Maximum Torque” That Can Be Transmitted
 about the Z-Axis in an Axisymmetric Analysis 
 When modeling surface-based contact with axisymmetric elements
 (element types CAX and CGAX ), Abaqus/Standard can calculate the maximum torque (output variable CTRQ ) that can be transmitted about
 the z -axis. This capability is often
 of interest when modeling threaded connectors (see Axisymmetric analysis of a threaded connection ). The maximum
 torque, T , is defined as 
 T 
 = 
 ∫ 
 ∫ 
 r 
 2 
 ⁢ 
 p 
 ⁢ 
 d 
 ⁢ 
 s 
 ⁢ 
 d 
 ⁢ 
 θ 
 , 
 where p is
 the pressure transmitted across the interface, r is the radius to a point on the
 interface, and s is the current
 distance along the interface in the r – z plane. This definition of
 “torque” effectively assumes a friction coefficient of unity. 
 Whole Model Contact-Related Energy Variables 
 For contact pairs, the same contact-related energy variables are
 available in Abaqus/Standard as for general contact, as described in Whole Model Contact-Related Energy Variables .