Contact Initialization for Contact Pairs in Abaqus/Standard 
 Contact Initialization for Contact Pairs in Abaqus/Standard 
 Initial overclosures in an Abaqus/Standard  contact pair are treated as interference fits by default. Alternatively, initial
 overclosures can be treated as unintended and resolved by either adjusting the position of the
 surfaces automatically or, for small-sliding and tied contact pairs, introducing an offset
 distance term in the contact penetration calculations. 
 Options for modeling interference fits are discussed in Modeling Contact Interference Fits in Abaqus/Standard . You can also invoke an algorithm to adjust
 initial surface positions to close small gaps or to achieve a specified initial clearance. 
 Adjusting the position of surfaces in an 
 Abaqus/Standard  contact
 pair: 
 can be performed only at the start of a simulation; 
 causes Abaqus/Standard to move the nodes of the secondary surface so that they precisely contact the main
 surface (with some exceptions for surface-to-surface discretization and overlapping
 interaction definitions); 
 does not create any strain in the model; 
 can eliminate small gaps or penetrations caused by numerical roundoff
 when a graphical preprocessor 
 such as 
 Abaqus/CAE 
 is used and, thus, prevent possible convergence problems; 
 is required when two surfaces are tied together for the duration of
 the analysis; 
 should not be used to correct gross errors in the mesh design; 
 cannot be used with symmetric main-secondary contact; and 
 will account for shell and membrane thicknesses and shell offsets
 (these factors are accounted for in the adjustment zone and in the adjustments)
 for contact formulations other than the default finite-sliding, node-to-surface
 contact formulation (see 
 Contact Formulations in Abaqus/Standard ).
 This page discusses: Treatment of Initial Overclosures and Unintended Initial Gaps Adjusting Initial Surface Positions to Resolve Small Initial Gaps or Overclosures Storing Penetration Offsets for Noncompliant Surfaces to Be Initially in Contact Initial Clearance or Overclosure for Small-Sliding Contact Alternative Methods for Specifying Precise Initial Clearances or Overclosures 
 See Also About Contact Pairs in Abaqus/Standard Modeling Contact Interference Fits in Abaqus/Standard Defining Tied Contact in Abaqus/Standard Contact Formulations in Abaqus/Standard Alternative General Contact Initialization Methods Based on Storing Offsets In Other Guides *CLEARANCE *CONTACT PAIR Defining surface-to-surface contact Using contact and constraint detection 
 Products Abaqus/Standard Abaqus/CAE 
 Treatment of Initial Overclosures and Unintended Initial Gaps 
 By default, initial overclosures for Abaqus/Standard  contact pairs are treated as interference fits (see Modeling Contact Interference Fits in Abaqus/Standard ). Optionally, initial overclosures can be
 treated as initially in contact and just touching the main surface. Situations in which
 regions with small initial overclosures or gaps should be treated as initially in contact
 and just touching include: 
 Regions meant to fit together (be in conforming contact) in the original
 configuration. 
 Regions meant to be tied together for the duration of the analysis (see Defining Tied Contact in Abaqus/Standard ). 
 Small penetrations or gaps for nodes to treat as initially in contact can be
 resolved by either adjusting the position of the surfaces automatically (see 
 Adjusting Initial Surface Positions to Resolve Small Initial Gaps or Overclosures )
 or, for small-sliding and tied contact pairs, introducing an offset distance
 term in the contact penetration calculations (see 
 Storing Penetration Offsets for Noncompliant Surfaces to Be Initially in Contact ).
 Adjusting Initial Surface Positions to Resolve Small Initial Gaps or Overclosures 
 You can control which secondary nodes can have their initial position adjusted, as necessary,
 such that the initial penetration becomes zero by specifying an "adjustment zone" distance
 or a node set label. 
 Using an “Adjustment Zone” to Control Which Secondary Nodes Have Initial Gaps and Overclosures Resolved 
 When you specify a , the depth of the “adjustment zone,” Abaqus/Standard forms an adjustment zone extending a distance a from the main
 surface in the gap direction and deeply into the penetration region. Abaqus/Standard measures the distance along the main surface normals that pass through the nodes of the
 secondary surface. Any nodes on the secondary surface that are within the “adjustment
 zone” in the initial geometry of the model are moved precisely onto the main surface. The
 motion of these secondary nodes does not create any strain in the model; it is treated as
 a change in the model definition. An example of adjusting the surfaces of a contact pair
 is shown in Figure 1 and Figure 2 . If you specify a negative value for a , Abaqus/Standard issues an error message. 
 Figure 1. Initial configuration of the contact surfaces showing the “adjustment zone.” The secondary
 surface is in bold. 
 Figure 2. Configuration of the contact surfaces after the adjustment. Nodes
 within the adjustment zone and overclosed nodes have been moved. 
 Input File Usage Use one of the
following options to specify the adjustment zone: CONTACT PAIR , ADJUST = a 
 secondary_surface, main_surface 
 ... CONTACT PAIR , ADJUST = YES , POSITION TOLERANCE = a 
 secondary_surface, main_surface 
 ... 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage Interaction module: contact interaction editor: Specify tolerance for adjustment zone : a 
 Special Case of Adjusting Only Overclosed Secondary Nodes 
 When you specify the depth of the adjustment zone, Abaqus/Standard moves any secondary nodes penetrating the main surface in the initial configuration
 so that they just contact the main surface. Specifying a value of 0.0 for
 a causes Abaqus/Standard to adjust only those secondary nodes that are penetrating the main surface. Figure 3 shows the effect of specifying a =0.0 in the example shown in
 Figure 1 . Specifying a =0.0 is not the same as omitting the adjustment
 zone parameter. If you omit the adjustment zone parameter, overclosures are treated as
 interference fits. 
 Figure 3. Adjusted configuration of contact surfaces when
 a =0. 
 Using a Node Set Label When Adjusting Surfaces 
 You can specify a node set label instead of an adjustment zone depth when only a subset of the
 secondary nodes should be adjusted and specifying a may cause the
 inappropriate adjustment of other secondary nodes. Abaqus/Standard adjusts only those nodes on the secondary surface belonging to the node set. The node
 set can contain nodes that are not on the secondary surface at all: Abaqus/Standard will ignore them and adjust only the nodes in the node set that are part of the
 secondary surface. 
 Abaqus/Standard moves any secondary nodes in the specified node set regardless of how far they are from
 the main surface. The adjustments of the nodes from their initial configurations do not
 create strains in the elements forming the secondary surface. If Abaqus/Standard adjusts secondary nodes that are far from the main surface, the elements may become
 poorly shaped, which can cause convergence difficulties. Input File Usage CONTACT PAIR , ADJUST = node_set_label 
 secondary_surface, main_surface 
 ... 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage Interaction module: contact interaction editor: Adjust secondary nodes in set: node_set_label 
 Adjusting Overclosed Secondary Nodes Using a Node Set Label 
 Because Abaqus/Standard adjusts only the secondary nodes in the specified node set, any overclosed secondary
 nodes not in the specified node set remain overclosed at the start of the simulation.
 Using a node set label may, therefore, cause convergence problems if severely overclosed
 secondary nodes, which need to be adjusted, are not included in the node set. This
 behavior is different from that seen if a is specified, in which
 case Abaqus/Standard adjusts all of the overclosed nodes on the secondary surface. 
 Comments Unique to Surface-to-Surface Contact 
 The following points apply to the surface-to-surface discretization (see 
 Contact Formulations in Abaqus/Standard 
 for further discussion of surface-to-surface discretization): 
 Strain-free adjustments to secondary node positions may not result in exactly zero gap with
 respect to the main surface as measured at a secondary node. The adjustments are made
 to achieve zero gap between the surfaces in an average sense in a region near each
 secondary node within the adjustment zone. 
 Strain-free adjustments will occur for some secondary nodes outside the adjustment zone if a
 significant portion of a secondary face (or segment in two dimensions) to which it is
 attached is within the adjustment zone. 
 Adjustments for Overlapping Contact Pairs 
 Nodal adjustment definitions are processed sequentially at the start of an analysis. If different
 constraint or contact definitions involve the same nodes, some adjustments may cause lack
 of compliance for contact or constraint definitions that were previously processed. These
 conflicts can be avoided in some cases by changing the processing order of constraint and
 contact definitions: nodes in common between different contact or constraint definitions
 should be processed first as secondary nodes and later as main nodes. Input File Usage To change the
processing order of constraint and contact definitions, change the order of the
definitions in the input file. Constraint and contact definitions are processed
in the order in which they appear. 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage To change the processing
order of constraint and contact definitions, change the names of the
constraints and interactions in the model. Constraints and interactions are
processed alphabetically according to their
name. 
 Storing Penetration Offsets for Noncompliant Surfaces to Be Initially in Contact 
 In some cases adjustments to the initial positions of surfaces to achieve
 zero initial penetration cause element distortion issues. It is generally
 recommended that you resolve the clash in the initial mesh by repositioning
 parts or making other changes to the model. However, for small-sliding and tied
 contact pairs, another modeling technique is available. You can specify that 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 introduce offset distance terms in the contact penetration calculations such
 that the modified initial penetration is zero even though the configuration
 appears to have an initial penetration or gap. This contact offset persists
 throughout the simulation and can cause confusion with respect to interpreting
 configurations. 
 This method involves explicitly setting the "adjustment zone" parameter to indicate that no
 initial surface position adjustments are to be made and specifying a position tolerance,
 a . Abaqus/Standard creates a penetration offset for secondary nodes within a gap distance,
 a , or overclosed with respect to the main surface. Input File Usage CONTACT PAIR , ADJUST = NO , POSITION TOLERANCE = a 
 secondary_surface, main_surface 
 ... 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage Storing penetration offsets
in the contact penetration calculations is not supported in 
 Abaqus/CAE . 
 Initial Clearance or Overclosure for Small-Sliding Contact 
 You can define precise initial clearance or overclosure values and contact directions for the
 nodes on the secondary surface when they would not be computed accurately enough from the
 nodal coordinates; for example, if the initial clearance is very small compared to the
 coordinate values. For more information, see Additional Contact Initialization Options for Small-Sliding Contact in Abaqus/Standard . 
 You can define initial clearance or overclosure values only for
 small-sliding contact ( Contact Formulations in Abaqus/Standard ).
 For a technique that can be used to model clearances or overclosures between
 finite-sliding contact pairs, see 
 Alternative Methods for Specifying Precise Initial Clearances or Overclosures 
 below. 
 Alternative Methods for Specifying Precise Initial Clearances or Overclosures 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 offers an alternative method of defining precise initial clearances or
 overclosures that is applicable to both small-sliding and finite-sliding
 contact pairs. In this method you specify an adjustment zone depth for the
 contact pair (as described above in 
 Adjusting Initial Surface Positions to Resolve Small Initial Gaps or Overclosures )
 to move the surfaces forming the contact pair exactly into contact at the start
 of the analysis. Then, in the first step of the simulation you specify an
 allowable contact interference, v ,
 for the contact pair (see 
 Modeling Contact Interference Fits in Abaqus/Standard ).
 The contact interference definition must refer to an amplitude curve; the form
 of the amplitude curve depends on whether a clearance or an overclosure is
 being defined and is described below. The clearance or overclosure will be
 uniform across the surfaces. 
 Input File Usage Use all of the
following options: CONTACT PAIR , ADJUST = a 
 secondary_surface, main_surface 
 AMPLITUDE , NAME = amplitude_name 
 CONTACT INTERFERENCE , AMPLITUDE = amplitude_name 
 secondary_surface, main_surface , 
 v 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage Interaction module: contact interaction editor: Specify tolerance for adjustment zone : a , Interference Fit : toggle on Uniform allowable interference , Amplitude : amplitude_name , Magnitude at start of step : v 
 Specifying a Precise Clearance by Defining an Allowable Contact Interference 
 To specify a precise clearance by defining an allowable contact
 interference, the amplitude curve should have a constant magnitude for the
 duration of the step. A positive value should be given as the allowable
 interference, v .
 When viewed in 
 Abaqus/CAE ,
 these surfaces will appear to penetrate each other when they are in
 contact. The surfaces start the simulation with coordinates that have them
 exactly touching, but the specified interference v 
 makes them behave as if they have a clearance between them. 
 Specifying a Precise Overclosure by Defining an Allowable Contact Interference 
 To specify a precise overclosure by defining an allowable contact
 interference, the amplitude curve should ramp from zero to unity over the
 duration of the step to allow 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 to resolve the overclosure gradually. A negative value should be given as the
 allowable interference, v .
 When viewed in 
 Abaqus/CAE ,
 the surfaces start the simulation with coordinates that have them exactly
 touching, but the specified interference 
 v makes them behave as if they are overclosed. As 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 resolves the overclosure, these surfaces will appear to separate from each
 other. When the gap between the two surfaces is equal to a distance of
 ∣ v ∣ , the surfaces
 will behave as if they are precisely in contact.