Analytical Rigid Surface Definition 
 Analytical Rigid Surface Definition 
 An analytical rigid surface: 
 can be two-dimensional or three-dimensional; 
 must be defined as model data; 
 can be used with the infinitesimal-sliding, small-sliding, or
 finite-sliding mechanical contact formulations; 
 should be oriented such that the analytical rigid surface's outward
 normal points toward any body it may contact; and 
 is associated with a node, known as the rigid body reference node,
 whose motion governs the motion of the surface. 
 This page discusses: What Are Analytical Rigid Surfaces and Why Use Them? Creating an Analytical Rigid Surface Creating an Analytical Rigid Surface in a User Subroutine Defining Analytical Rigid Surfaces When Drag Chain or Rigid Surface Elements Are Used 
 See Also About Surfaces In Other Guides About Contact Interactions RSURFU *RIGID BODY *SURFACE 
 Products Abaqus/Standard Abaqus/Explicit Abaqus/CAE 
 What Are Analytical Rigid Surfaces and Why Use Them? 
 Analytical rigid surfaces are geometric surfaces with profiles that can be
 described with straight and curved line segments. These profiles can be swept
 along a generator vector or rotated about an axis to form a three-dimensional
 surface. An analytical rigid surface is associated with a rigid body reference
 node, whose motion governs the motion of the surface. An analytical rigid
 surface does not contribute to the rigid body's mass or inertia properties (see
 Rigid Body Definition ).
 The degrees of freedom of the rigid body reference node become active only when
 the analytical surface is used in a contact interaction or when an element
 (such as a spring element or a mass element) is connected to the rigid body
 reference node. 
 Analytical rigid surfaces are always single-sided with their orientation
 specified through their definition. Therefore, contact interaction is
 recognized only on the outer boundary of an analytical rigid surface. To model
 contact on both sides of a thin structure, use an analytical rigid surface that
 wraps around the boundary of the thin structure. 
 Advantages 
 Using analytical rigid surfaces instead of defining element-based rigid
 surfaces provides two important advantages in contact modeling. 
 Many curved geometries can be modeled exactly with analytical rigid
 surfaces because of the ability to parameterize the surface with curved line
 segments. The result is a smoother surface description, which can reduce
 contact noise and provide a better approximation to the physical contact
 constraint. 
 Using analytical rigid surfaces instead of rigid surfaces formed by
 element faces may result in decreased computational cost incurred by the
 contact algorithm. 
 The use of curved line segments instead of many linear facets will
 decrease the time spent in contact tracking operations. Additional
 computational savings may be realized in three dimensions because of the
 intrinsic two-dimensional descriptions of the analytical surfaces. 
 Disadvantages 
 There are also some disadvantages to using analytical rigid surfaces for
 contact modeling. 
 An analytical rigid surface must always act as a main surface in a contact interaction.
 Therefore, contact cannot be modeled between two analytical rigid surfaces. 
 Contact forces and pressures cannot be contoured on an analytical rigid surface. However,
 contact forces and pressures can be plotted on the secondary surface. 
 The use of a very large number (thousands) of segments to define an
 analytical rigid surface can degrade performance. In most cases it is not
 necessary to use a large number of segments to define an analytical rigid
 surface, because curved segment types are allowed. In rare cases in which a
 very large number of segments would be necessary, the analysis may be more
 efficient if an element-based rigid surface is used instead (see 
 Element-Based Surface Definition ).
 An analytical rigid surface does not contribute to the mass and rotary
 inertia properties of the rigid body with which it is associated. Therefore, if
 the mass distribution on an analytical rigid surface needs to be accounted for,
 equivalent mass and rotary inertia properties must be defined for the rigid
 body by using MASS and ROTARYI elements, or a finite element discretization of the surface
 should be used instead of an analytical rigid surface (see 
 Rigid Body Definition ).
 In 
 Abaqus/Explicit 
 reaction force output for a rigid body containing an analytical rigid surface
 is calculated only for constraints that are active at the reference node (e.g.,
 constraints specified as boundary conditions). If the net contact force on the
 rigid body corresponding to an unconstrained degree of freedom is desired, it
 must be calculated from the rigid body's acceleration and mass. 
 Creating an Analytical Rigid Surface 
 You can define the following types of simple, two- or three-dimensional,
 geometric analytical surfaces: 
 planar (two-dimensional) surfaces, 
 three-dimensional cylindrical (swept) surfaces, and 
 three-dimensional surfaces of revolution. 
 In 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 if none of these surfaces is adequate, you can define a more general analytical
 surface with user subroutine 
 RSURFU . 
 Analytical rigid surfaces are useful when the cross-sections of the surfaces
 can be represented by straight and curved line segments. The curved segments
 can be either circular or parabolic arcs. In two-dimensional simulations the
 line segments are defined in the global coordinate system of the deformable
 model. In three-dimensional simulations a local, two-dimensional coordinate
 system must be created, and the line segments are then defined in that system.
 The two standard types of three-dimensional analytical rigid surfaces available
 are shown in 
 Figure 1 .
 Figure 1. Examples of three-dimensional rigid surfaces. 
 You must indicate which type of analytical surface (planar, cylindrical, or
 revolution) is being created and assign a name to the surface. In addition, you
 must define the analytical surface as part of a rigid body by specifying the
 name of the analytical surface and the rigid body reference node that will
 control the motion of the surface in a rigid body definition. 
 An 
 Abaqus 
 model can be defined in terms of an assembly of part instances (see 
 Assembly Definition ).
 A part can contain only one analytical surface. A part containing an analytical
 surface definition cannot also contain elements. 
 Input File Usage Use both of the following options to create an analytical
rigid surface: SURFACE , TYPE = analytical_surface_type , NAME = name 
 RIGID BODY , ANALYTICAL SURFACE = name , REF NODE = n Abaqus/CAE Usage Part module: Create Part : Name: analytical_rigid_part : select Analytical rigid as the Type Then do one of the following: Any module except Sketch, Job, and Visualization: Tools Surface Create : 
select analytical_rigid_part Interaction module: Create Constraint : Rigid body : Analytical Surface : Edit : select analytical_rigid_part Interaction module: Create Interaction : any valid type : select analytical_rigid_part as one of the regions involved in contact 
 Defining a Surface Profile 
 The surface profile is the collection of line segments defining the
 cross-section of the surface. The surface type determines whether the profile
 is swept (cylindrical surfaces), revolved (surfaces of revolution), or, in the
 two-dimensional case, used as is (planar surfaces). 
 You construct a profile by providing the endpoint of each line segment in
 the profile; the starting point is always the endpoint of the previous segment,
 or, in the case of the first segment, the point specified as the starting
 point. The center points of circular arcs must be given. 
 Abaqus 
 can define only arcs that are less than 179.74°; thus, it will use the shorter
 arc defined by the data provided (use two adjacent arcs to define a longer
 arc). For parabolic arcs you must give a third point that lies on the parabola
 and within the arc. 
 Two-Dimensional Rigid Surfaces 
 To define a planar rigid surface, specify the line segments forming the
 rigid surface's profile in the global coordinate system. If the analytical
 surface is being defined inside a part, specify the line segments in the local
 part coordinate system. 
 Input File Usage SURFACE , TYPE = SEGMENTS , NAME = name 
 data lines to define the line segments forming the surface For example, the definition of the two-dimensional rigid
surface depicted in the figure below is SURFACE , TYPE = SEGMENTS , NAME =BSURF
START, x a , y a 
CIRCL, x b , y b , x c , y c 
LINE, x d , y d 
CIRCL, x e , y e , x f , y f 
 RIGID BODY , ANALYTICAL SURFACE =BSURF, REF NODE =101 where x i 
and y i 
are the global coordinates of the points shown in the figure. 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage Part module: Create Part : Name: analytical_rigid_part : select 2D Planar or Axisymmetric as the Modeling Space and Analytical rigid as the Type 
 Three-Dimensional Cylindrical Rigid Surfaces 
 To define a cylindrical rigid surface in a model that is not defined in
 terms of an assembly of part instances, specify the points
 a , b , and c 
 shown in 
 Figure 2 
 that define the local coordinate system. 
 Figure 2. Cylindrical rigid surface. 
 Give the coordinates of these points—( X a , Y a , Z a ),
 ( X b , Y b , Z b ),
 and ( X c , Y c , Z c )—in
 the default global coordinate system. As shown in 
 Figure 2 ,
 point a defines the origin of the local system; point
 b defines the local x -axis; and point
 c defines the generator vector, which is the
 negative local z -axis. If the
 segment a ⁢ c 
 is not perpendicular to a ⁢ b ,
 Abaqus 
 will automatically adjust point c within the plane defined
 by points a , b , and
 c , such that they become perpendicular. The line segments
 forming the profile of the rigid surface are defined in the local
 x – y plane. The three-dimensional
 surface is formed by sweeping this profile along the generator vector. The
 resulting surface extends to infinity in both the positive and negative
 directions of the generator vector. 
 To define a cylindrical rigid surface within a part, specify the line
 segments forming the profile of the rigid surface in the part coordinate
 system. For an analytical surface defined within a part (or part instance),
 point a is located at the origin of the part coordinate
 system, point b is located on the part
 x -axis, and point c is located on the
 negative part z -axis. If the segment
 a ⁢ c 
 is not perpendicular to a ⁢ b ,
 Abaqus 
 will automatically adjust point c within the plane defined
 by points a , b , and
 c , such that they become perpendicular. You cannot
 redefine this analytical surface coordinate system; instead, you can position
 the surface in the model by giving positioning data when you instance the part
 (see 
 Assembly Definition ).
 Input File Usage SURFACE , TYPE = CYLINDER , NAME = name 
 X a , Y a , Z a , X b , Y b , Z b 
 X c , Y c , Z c 
 data lines to define the line segments forming the surface For example, the following input, where
 x i 
and y i 
are points in the local coordinate system, would define the rigid surface shown
in 
 Figure 2 
in a model that is not defined in terms of an assembly of part instances (the
reference node is not shown in the figure): SURFACE , TYPE = CYLINDER , NAME =CSURF
 X a , Y a , Z a , X b , Y b , Z b 
 X c , Y c , Z c 
START, x s , y s 
LINE, x 1 , y 1 
CIRCL, …
…
 RIGID BODY , ANALYTICAL SURFACE =CSURF, REF NODE = n Leave the first two data lines blank to define a
cylindrical rigid surface within a part. 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage Part module: Create Part : Name: analytical_rigid_part : select 3D as the Modeling Space , Analytical rigid as the Type , and Extruded shell as the Base Feature 
 Three-Dimensional Surfaces of Revolution 
 To define a rigid surface of revolution in a model that is not defined in
 terms of an assembly of part instances, specify the two points
 a and b shown in 
 Figure 3 
 that define the local coordinate system. 
 Figure 3. Rigid surface of revolution. 
 Give the coordinates of these points—( X a , Y a , Z a )
 and ( X b , Y b , Z b )—in
 the default global coordinate system. As shown in 
 Figure 3 ,
 point a defines the origin of the local system, and the
 vector from a to b defines the local
 z -axis, which is the axis of a cylindrical coordinate
 system. The line segments forming the profile of the surface of revolution are
 defined in the local r – z plane, where
 the local r -axis aligns with the radial axis of the
 cylindrical coordinate system. The three-dimensional surface is formed by
 revolving this profile about the axis of the cylindrical system, the local
 z -axis. 
 To define a rigid surface of revolution within a part, specify the line
 segments forming the cross-section of the rigid surface in the local part
 coordinate system. For an analytical surface defined within a part (or part
 instance), point a is located at the origin of the part
 coordinate system, the part x -axis aligns with the radial
 axis of the cylindrical coordinate system, and point b is
 located on the part y -axis. You cannot redefine this local
 axis; instead, you can position the surface in the model by giving positioning
 data when you instance the part (see 
 Assembly Definition ).
 Input File Usage SURFACE , TYPE = REVOLUTION , NAME = name 
 X a , Y a , Z a , X b , Y b , Z b 
 data lines to define the line segments forming the surface For example, the following input would define the rigid
surface shown in 
 Figure 3 
(the reference node is not shown in the figure): SURFACE , TYPE = REVOLUTION , NAME = REVSURF 
 X a , Y a , Z a , X b , Y b , Z b 
START, x s , y s 
LINE, …
CIRCL, …
…
 RIGID BODY , ANALYTICAL SURFACE = REVSURF , REF NODE =999 Leave the first data line blank to define a rigid
surface of revolution within a part. 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage Part module: Create Part : Name: analytical_rigid_part : select 3D as the Modeling Space , Analytical rigid as the Type , and Revolved shell as the Base Feature 
 Defining the Surface Normals 
 The outward surface normal for analytical rigid surfaces is determined by
 the direction of the line segments forming the profile of the surface. The
 sequence of line segments defines a vector s along the rigid
 surface from the starting point of the first segment to the ending point of the
 last segment. The outward surface normal is created by taking the cross product
 of the vector e 3 ,
 the unit normal to the plane in which the surface is defined, and the vector
 s , the tangent to the
 surface: n = e 3 × s .
 Figure 4 
 shows the vector s in the definition
 plane of an analytical rigid surface. 
 Figure 4. Orientation of surface normals for a rigid surface. 
 The unit vector e 3 
 is defined such that e 1 ,
 e 2 ,
 and e 3 
 form a right-handed orthonormal coordinate system. In-plane coordinate
 directions e 1 
 and e 2 
 depend on the type of analytical rigid surface being defined. For
 two-dimensional analytical rigid surfaces they correspond to the global
 X - and Y -axes in planar models and
 the r - and z -axes in axisymmetric
 models. For cylindrical rigid surfaces they correspond to the local
 x - and y -axes, and for rigid surfaces
 of revolution they correspond to the local r - and
 z -axes. The outward normals for a cylindrical rigid
 surface and rigid surface of revolution are shown in 
 Figure 2 
 and 
 Figure 3 ,
 respectively. 
 If the line segments are specified in the wrong order, the surface normals
 of a rigid surface will appear in exactly the opposite direction to what was
 intended. Such a mistake can be corrected only by specifying the line segments
 in the opposite sequence. 
 Smoothing Analytical Rigid Surfaces 
 In many cases it can be beneficial to smooth surfaces to more accurately represent the surface
 geometry. In particular, it can be very difficult to obtain a converged solution in a
 finite-sliding Abaqus/Standard simulation if the main surface does not have continuous normal and surface tangent
 vectors (see Contact Formulations in Abaqus/Standard ); therefore,
 it is important to smooth any sharp corners on the main surface so that discontinuities in
 these vectors are eliminated. 
 By default, Abaqus does not smooth main surfaces that are analytical rigid surfaces. Smooth transitions
 between adjacent line segments can always be created by manually inserting additional
 curved line segments. Alternatively, smooth surfaces can be generated automatically by Abaqus . You specify the radius of curvature, r , in the units of
 length used in the model, that Abaqus will use to construct a smooth transition between any discontinuous line segments
 forming the rigid surface. The default value of zero provides no smoothing of the surface. 
 The effect of a fillet radius on adjoining line segments and on adjoining
 line and circular arc segments is illustrated in 
 Figure 5 .
 Figure 5. Effect of fillet radius on an analytical rigid surface. 
 The sharp corners have been smoothed using the fillet radius so that the normal and tangent
 surface vectors are continuous along the entire main surface. Any value
 r can be used in a model. However, if
 r is greater than the length of either of the two adjacent
 segments, no smoothing will occur. Therefore, a practical limit on the size of
 r is the length of the smallest line segment forming the
 surface. Input File Usage SURFACE , TYPE = analytical_surface_type , NAME = name , FILLET RADIUS = r Abaqus/CAE Usage 
 When you create an analytical rigid part in 
 Abaqus/CAE ,
you can create a fillet radius between segments or join the segments using
arcs. See 
 Sketching simple objects . 
 Surface Tangent Conventions 
 Abaqus 
 forms analytical rigid surfaces such that the first surface tangent,
 t 1 ,
 is always along the direction of the line segments forming the surface
 s . The second surface
 tangent, t 2 ,
 is defined such that the outward surface normal and the two surface tangents
 form a right-handed orthonormal system, as shown in 
 Figure 6 .
 Figure 6. Surface tangent and outward normal definitions for analytical rigid
 surfaces. 
 Creating an Analytical Rigid Surface in a User Subroutine 
 More complicated analytical rigid surfaces can be defined in 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 by user subroutine 
 RSURFU . Writing subroutine 
 RSURFU to create a smooth surface is usually difficult, and
 convergence problems are often caused by inadequate surface definition in this
 subroutine. When using 
 RSURFU , ensure that the outward surface normal and the two
 surface tangents form a right-handed orthonormal system. In two-dimensional
 cases the second surface tangent is always (0, 0, −1). You must also ensure
 that the surface is smooth in finite-sliding simulations and that the
 orientation of the rigid surface relative to the deformable surface is
 reasonable (i.e., the rigid surface cannot be inside the deformable surface). 
 Input File Usage SURFACE , TYPE = USER , NAME = name Abaqus/CAE Usage 
 User subroutine 
 RSURFU is not supported in 
 Abaqus/CAE . 
 Defining Analytical Rigid Surfaces When Drag Chain or Rigid Surface Elements Are Used 
 An alternative method of defining analytical rigid surfaces must be used to
 define the surface of the seabed when three-dimensional drag chain elements
 (available only in 
 Abaqus/Standard )
 are used. This alternative method must also be used when rigid surface elements
 are used; these elements are required only when CAXA or SAXA elements contact a rigid surface. For this method the rigid
 surface must be flat and parallel to the
 x – y plane. 
 In a model defined in terms of an assembly of part instances, the rigid
 surface definition must appear inside the same part definition as the drag
 chain or rigid surface elements. 
 You must indicate which type of analytical surface (planar, cylindrical, or
 user-defined) is being created. Cylindrical rigid surfaces are not valid for
 use with CAXA or SAXA elements. In addition, you must assign a name to the surface and
 identify the rigid body reference node that will control the motion of the
 surface. 
 Input File Usage RIGID SURFACE , TYPE = surface_type , NAME = name , REF NODE = n Abaqus/CAE Usage 
 Drag chain and rigid surface elements are not supported in 
 Abaqus/CAE . 
 Two-Dimensional Rigid Surfaces 
 To define a planar rigid surface, define the line segments forming the rigid
 surface's cross-section in the global coordinate system. You must provide the
 endpoint of each line segment; the starting point is always the endpoint of the
 previous segment, or, in the case of the first segment, the point specified as
 the starting point. The centers of the circular arcs, points
 c and f in 
 Figure 7 ,
 must be given. 
 Abaqus 
 can define only arcs that are less than, but not equal to, 179.74°; thus, it
 will use the shorter arc defined by the data provided (use two adjacent arcs to
 define a longer arc). For parabolic arcs you must give a third point that lies
 on the parabola and within the arc. 
 Figure 7. Two-dimensional analytical rigid surface contacting a deformable
 body. 
 Input File Usage RIGID SURFACE , TYPE = SEGMENTS , NAME = name , REF NODE = n 
 START , starting point X - or r -coordinate, starting point Y - or z -coordinate 
 data lines to define the endpoints of the line segments forming the surface, beginning with the word LINE (for straight line segments), CIRCL (for circular arc segments), or PARAB (for parabolic arc segments) Abaqus/CAE Usage 
 Drag chain and rigid surface elements are not supported in 
 Abaqus/CAE . 
 Three-Dimensional Cylindrical Rigid Surfaces 
 To define a cylindrical rigid surface, specify the points
 a , b , and c 
 shown in 
 Figure 2 
 that define the local coordinate system. Give the coordinates of these
 points—( X a , Y a , Z a ),
 ( X b , Y b , Z b ),
 and ( X c , Y c , Z c )—in
 the default global coordinate system. As shown in 
 Figure 2 ,
 point a defines the origin of the local system; point
 b defines the local x -axis; and point
 c defines the generator vector, which is the
 negative local z -axis. The
 line segments forming the cross-section of the rigid surface are defined in the
 local x – y plane. The
 three-dimensional surface is formed by sweeping this cross-section along the
 generator vector. The resulting surface extends to infinity in both the
 positive and negative directions of the generator vector. 
 Input File Usage RIGID SURFACE , TYPE = CYLINDER , NAME = name , REF NODE = n 
 X a , Y a , Z a , X b , Y b , Z b 
 X c , Y c , Z c 
 START , starting point x -coordinate, starting point y -coordinate 
 data lines to define the endpoints of the line segments forming the surface, beginning with the word LINE (for straight line segments), CIRCL (for circular arc segments), or PARAB (for parabolic arc segments) Abaqus/CAE Usage 
 Drag chain and rigid surface elements are not supported in 
 Abaqus/CAE .