Contact Formulations in Abaqus/Standard 
 Contact Formulations in Abaqus/Standard 
 Abaqus/Standard provides several contact fomulations. Each formulation is based on a choice of a contact
 discretization, a tracking approach, and assignment of main and
 secondary roles to the contact surfaces. For general contact interactions,
 the discretization, tracking approach, and surface role assignments are selected automatically
 by Abaqus/Standard ; for contact pairs, you can specify these aspects of the contact formulation using the
 interface described in About Contact Pairs in Abaqus/Standard . The default contact
 formulation is applicable in most situations, but you may find it desirable to choose another
 formulation in some cases. This section discusses in detail the formulations that Abaqus/Standard uses in contact simulations. 
 Your choice of a tracking approach will have a considerable impact on how
 contact surfaces interact. In 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 there are two tracking approaches to account for the relative motion of two
 interacting surfaces in mechanical contact simulations: 
 finite sliding, which is the most general and allows any arbitrary
 motion of the surfaces (see 
 Finite-sliding interaction between deformable bodies 
 and 
 Finite-sliding interaction between a deformable and a rigid body );
 and 
 small sliding, which assumes that although two bodies may undergo
 large motions, there will be relatively little sliding of one surface along the
 other (see 
 Small-sliding interaction between bodies ).
 You can choose between node-to-surface contact discretization and true
 surface-to-surface contact discretization for each of the above tracking
 approaches. 
 This page discusses: Formulations for General Contact Discretization of Contact Pair Surfaces Contact Tracking Approaches Choosing the Main and Secondary Surface Roles in a Two-Surface Contact Pair Fundamental Choices Affecting the Contact Formulation Using the Finite-Sliding Tracking Approach Using the Small-Sliding Tracking Approach Local Tangent Directions on a Surface 
 See Also About General Contact in Abaqus/Standard About Contact Pairs in Abaqus/Standard In Other Guides About Surfaces *CONTACT *CONTACT PAIR Defining general contact Defining surface-to-surface contact Defining self-contact Using contact and constraint detection 
 Products Abaqus/Standard Abaqus/CAE 
 Formulations for General Contact 
 By default, general contact in 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 uses the finite-sliding, surface-to-surface contact formulation. This
 formulation can also be used for contact pairs, but it is not the default. The
 discussions in this section of finite-sliding, surface-to-surface contact apply
 equally to general contact and to contact pairs. 
 In a general contact domain the main and secondary roles are assigned to surfaces automatically,
 although it is possible to override these default assignments. The behavior of main surfaces
 and secondary surfaces is consistent across general contact and contact pair interactions.
 The specification of main and secondary surfaces in a general contact domain is covered in
 detail in Contact Controls Specific to General Contact in Abaqus/Standard . 
 Discretization of Contact Pair Surfaces 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 applies conditional constraints at various locations on interacting surfaces to
 simulate contact conditions. The locations and conditions of these constraints
 depend on the contact discretization used in the overall contact formulation. 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 offers two contact discretization options: a traditional “node-to-surface”
 discretization and a true “surface-to-surface” discretization. 
 Node-to-Surface Contact Discretization 
 With traditional node-to-surface discretization the contact conditions are established such that
 each “secondary” node on one side of a contact interface effectively interacts with a
 point of projection on the “main” surface on the opposite side of the contact interface
 (see Figure 1 ). Thus, each contact condition involves a single secondary node and a group of nearby
 main nodes from which values are interpolated to the projection point. 
 Figure 1. Node-to-surface contact discretization. 
 Traditional node-to-surface discretization has the following
 characteristics: 
 The secondary nodes are constrained not to penetrate into the main surface; however, the nodes
 of the main surface can, in principle, penetrate into the secondary surface (for
 example, see the case on the upper-right of Figure 2 ). 
 Figure 2. Comparison of contact enforcement for different main-secondary surface assignments with
 node-to-surface and surface-to-surface contact discretizations. 
 The contact direction is based on the normal of the main surface. 
 The only information needed for the secondary surface is the location and surface area
 associated with each node; the direction of the secondary surface normal and secondary
 surface curvature are not relevant. Thus, the secondary surface can be defined as a
 group of nodes—a node-based surface. 
 Node-to-surface discretization is available even if a node-based surface
 is not used in a contact pair definition. 
 Surface-to-Surface Contact Discretization 
 Surface-to-surface discretization considers the shape of both the secondary and main surfaces in
 the region of contact constraints. Surface-to-surface discretization has the following key
 characteristics: 
 The surface-to-surface formulation enforces contact conditions in an average sense over regions
 nearby secondary nodes rather than only at individual secondary nodes. The averaging
 regions are approximately centered on secondary nodes, so each contact constraint will
 predominantly consider one secondary node but will also consider adjacent secondary
 nodes. Some penetration may be observed at individual nodes; however, large,
 undetected penetrations of main nodes into the secondary surface do not occur with
 this discretization. Figure 2 compares contact enforcement for node-to-surface and surface-to-surface contact for
 an example with dissimilar mesh refinement on the contacting bodies. 
 The contact direction is based on an average normal of the secondary surface in the region
 surrounding a secondary node. 
 Surface-to-surface discretization is not applicable if a node-based
 surface is used in the contact pair definition. 
 Choosing a Contact Discretization 
 In general, surface-to-surface discretization provides more accurate stress
 and pressure results than node-to-surface discretization if the surface
 geometry is reasonably well represented by the contact surfaces. 
 Figure 3 
 shows an example of improved contact pressure accuracy with surface-to-surface
 contact compared to node-to-surface contact. 
 Figure 3. Comparison of contact pressure accuracy for node-to-surface and
 surface-to-surface contact discretizations. 
 Since node-to-surface discretization simply resists penetrations of secondary nodes into the main
 surface, forces tend to concentrate at these secondary nodes. This concentration leads to
 spikes and valleys in the distribution of pressure across the surface. Surface-to-surface
 discretization resists penetrations in an average sense over finite regions of the
 secondary surface, which has a smoothing effect. As the mesh is refined, the discrepancies
 between the discretizations lessen, but for a given mesh refinement the surface-to-surface
 approach tends to provide more accurate stresses. 
 Contact using surface-to-surface discretization is also less sensitive to main and secondary
 surface designations than node-to-surface contact (see Choosing the Main and Secondary Surface Roles in a Two-Surface Contact Pair below).
 Figure 4 shows a simple model involving two blocks with dissimilar mesh densities. 
 Figure 4. Test model for comparison of different main and secondary surface designations. 
 The bottom block is fixed to the ground, and a uniform pressure of 100 Pa is
 applied to the top face of the top block. Analytically, the top block should exert a
 uniform pressure of 100 Pa on the bottom block across the entire contact
 interface. Table 1 compares the Abaqus analysis results for different contact discretizations and secondary surface
 designations. 
 Table 1. Error (from analytical results) for various discretization/secondary surface
 combinations. 
 Contact discretization 
 Secondary Surface 
 Maximum error in CPRESS 
 Node-to-surface 
 Top block 
 13% 
 Bottom block 
 31% 
 Surface-to-surface 
 Top block 
 ~1% 
 Bottom block 
 ~1% 
 If the surface geometry is not well-represented due to the use of a coarse
 mesh, significant inaccuracies can exist regardless of whether
 surface-to-surface contact or node-to-surface contact is used. In some cases
 surface smoothing techniques available for surface-to-surface contact can
 significantly improve solutions obtained with a coarse mesh. See 
 Smoothing Contact Surfaces in Abaqus/Standard 
 for a discussion of surface smoothing options for surface-to-surface contact. 
 Surface-to-surface discretization generally involves more nodes per
 constraint and can, therefore, increase solution cost. In most applications the
 extra cost is fairly small, but the cost can become significant in some cases.
 The following factors (especially in combination) can lead to
 surface-to-surface contact being costly: 
 A large fraction of the model is involved in contact. 
 The main surface is more refined than the secondary surface. 
 Multiple layers of shells are involved in contact, such that the main surface of one contact
 pair acts as the secondary surface of another contact pair. 
 The surface-to-surface formulation is primarily intended for common situations in which normal
 directions of contacting surfaces are approximately opposite. The node-to-surface contact
 formulation is often preferable for treating contact involving feature edges or corners if
 the respective secondary and main facet normal directions are not approximately opposite
 in the active contact region. 
 Contact Tracking Approaches 
 In 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 there are two tracking approaches to account for the relative motion of two
 interacting surfaces in mechanical contact simulations. 
 The Finite-Sliding Tracking Approach 
 Finite-sliding contact is the most general tracking approach and allows for
 arbitrary relative separation, sliding, and rotation of the contacting
 surfaces. For finite-sliding contact the connectivity of the currently active
 contact constraints changes upon relative tangential motion of the contacting
 surfaces. For a detailed description of how 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 calculates finite-sliding contact, see 
 Using the Finite-Sliding Tracking Approach 
 later in this section. 
 The Small-Sliding Tracking Approach 
 Small-sliding contact assumes that there will be relatively little sliding of one surface along
 the other and is based on linearized approximations of the main surface per constraint.
 The groups of nodes involved with individual contact constraints are fixed throughout the
 analysis for small-sliding contact, although the active/inactive status of these
 constraints typically can change during the analysis. You should consider using
 small-sliding contact when the approximations are reasonable, due to computational savings
 and added robustness. For a detailed description of how Abaqus/Standard calculates small-sliding contact, see Using the Small-Sliding Tracking Approach later in this
 section. 
 Choosing the Main and Secondary Surface Roles in a Two-Surface Contact Pair 
 Abaqus/Standard enforces the following rules related to the assignment of the main and secondary roles
 for contact surfaces: 
 Analytical rigid surfaces and rigid-element-based surfaces must always be the main surface. 
 A node-based surface can act only as a secondary surface and always uses node-to-surface
 contact. 
 Secondary surfaces must always be attached to deformable bodies or deformable bodies defined as
 rigid. 
 Both surfaces in a contact pair cannot be rigid surfaces with the
 exception of deformable surfaces defined as rigid (see 
 Rigid Body Definition ).
 When both surfaces in a contact pair are element-based and attached to either deformable bodies
 or deformable bodies defined as rigid, you have to choose which surface will be the main
 surface and which will be the secondary surface. This choice is particularly important for
 node-to-surface contact. Generally, if a smaller surface contacts a larger surface, it is
 best to choose the smaller surface as the secondary surface. If that distinction cannot be
 made, the main surface should be chosen as the surface of the stiffer body or as the surface
 with the coarser mesh if the two surfaces are on structures with comparable stiffnesses. The
 stiffness of the structure and not just the material should be considered when choosing the
 main and secondary surfaces. For example, a thin sheet of metal may be less stiff than a
 larger block of rubber even though the steel has a larger modulus than the rubber material.
 If the stiffness and mesh density are the same on both surfaces, the preferred choice is not
 always obvious. 
 The choice of main and secondary roles typically has much less effect on the results with a
 surface-to-surface contact formulation than with a node-to-surface contact formulation.
 However, the assignment of main and secondary roles can have a significant effect on
 performance with surface-to-surface contact if the two surfaces have dissimilar mesh
 refinement; the solution can become quite expensive if the secondary surface is much coarser
 than the main surface. 
 Fundamental Choices Affecting the Contact Formulation 
 Your choice of contact discretization and tracking approach have
 considerable impact on an analysis. In addition to the qualities already
 discussed, certain combinations of discretizations and tracking approaches have
 their own characteristics and limitations associated with them. These
 characteristics are summarized in 
 Table 2 .
 You should also consider the solution costs associated with the various contact
 formulations. 
 Table 2. Comparison of contact formulation characteristics. 
 Characteristic 
 Contact
 formulation 
 Node-to-surface 
 Surface-to-surface 
 Finite-sliding 
 Small-sliding 
 Finite-sliding 
 Small-sliding 
 Account for shell thickness by default 
 No 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 Allow self-contact 
 Yes 
 No 
 Yes 
 No 
 Allow double-sided surfaces 
 Secondary surface only 
 Secondary surface only 
 Yes 1 
 Yes 
 Surface smoothing by default 
 Some smoothing of main surface 
 Yes for anchor points; each constraint uses flat approximation of main
 surface 
 No 
 No for anchor points; each constraint uses flat approximation of main
 surface 
 Default constraint enforcement method 
 Augmented Lagrange method for 3D self-contact;
 otherwise, direct method 
 Direct method 
 Penalty method 
 Direct method 
 Ensure moment equilibrium for offset reference
 surfaces with friction 
 No 
 No 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 1 Double-sided main surfaces
 are allowed with the finite-sliding, surface-to-surface formulation only if the
 path-based tracking algorithm is used (see Path-Based Versus State-Based Tracking Algorithms ).
 Double-sided secondary surfaces are allowed with both tracking algorithms if the
 main surface is not user defined. 
 Accounting for Shell Thickness 
 Most contact formulations will account for the surface thickness of a shell
 when calculating contact constraints. However, the finite-sliding,
 node-to-surface formulation will not account for shell thicknesses. These
 calculations are discussed in more detail in 
 Accounting for Shell and Membrane Thickness .
 Allowing for Self-Contact 
 Self-contact is typically the result of large deformation in a model. It is
 often difficult to predict which regions will be involved in the contact or how
 they will move relative to each other. Therefore, self-contact cannot use the
 small-sliding tracking approach. 
 Allowing Double-Sided Surfaces 
 Doubled-sided contact surfaces based on shell-like elements are allowed to act as secondary
 and/or main surfaces for the surface-to-surface contact formulation by default and are
 allowed to act as the secondary surface for the node-to-surface contact formulation. For a
 shell-like surface to act as the main surface for the surface-to-surface formulation with
 the optional state-based tracking algorithm (see Path-Based Versus State-Based Tracking Algorithms below) or for
 the node-to-surface contact formulation, the surface must be defined as single-sided (see
 Defining Single-Sided Surfaces and Orientation Considerations for Shell-Like Surfaces for more information). 
 Surface Smoothing 
 When using node-to-surface discretization, corners or small protrusions of a jagged main surface
 are allowed to penetrate the spaces between nodes in the node-based surface. It is
 sometimes possible for a secondary node sliding along the main surface to snag on these
 corners. Therefore, Abaqus/Standard automatically smooths the main surface for contact calculations utilizing
 node-to-surface discretization to minimize this phenomenon. The details are discussed
 further in Smoothing Main Surfaces for the Finite-Sliding, Node-to-Surface Formulation later in this section. 
 No surface smoothing occurs by default when using surface-to-surface discretization.
 Surface-to-surface discretization considers contact conditions in an average sense over a
 finite region, which tends to alleviate problems associated with small protrusions of the
 main surface penetrating the secondary surface and introduces some inherent smoothing
 characteristics at the constraint level. However, this inherent smoothing typically does
 not significantly mitigate errors associated with poor geometric representations of curved
 surfaces when a relatively coarse mesh is used. In some cases nondefault circumferential
 or spherical surface smoothing methods available for surface-to-surface contact can
 significantly improve solutions obtained with a coarse mesh (see Smoothing Contact Surfaces in Abaqus/Standard ). 
 Constraint Enforcement Methods 
 In many cases 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 strictly enforces the contact constraints discussed previously by default.
 However, strict enforcement of contact constraints can sometimes lead to
 overconstraint issues (for example, see 
 Overconstraint Checks )
 or convergence difficulty. To address these issues and allow for decreased
 solution cost with typically minimal sacrifice to solution accuracy, 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 also provides penalty-based constraint enforcement methods. The numerical
 constraint enforcement methods (and defaults) are discussed in detail in 
 Contact Constraint Enforcement Methods in Abaqus/Standard .
 Moment Equilibrium 
 Based on Newton's third law of motion, contact forces should be
 self-equilibrating; that is, the net contact forces acting on the respective
 surfaces for each active contact constraint should be equal and opposite and
 effectively act through a common point. Contact constraints based on
 surface-to-surface contact discretization always exhibit this characteristic.
 Contact constraints based on node-to-surface discretization always generate
 zero net force, but under certain circumstances can generate a net moment in
 the numerical solution. Frictional forces associated with node-to-surface
 contact constraints will generate net moment if an offset exists between the
 respective reference surfaces. The following factors can contribute to a
 normal-direction offset between nodes of respective contact surfaces while
 contact constraints are active: 
 The presence of a softened pressure-versus-overclosure behavior (due to
 a user-specified, softened pressure-overclosure model or use of a constraint
 enforcement method, such as the penalty method, that exhibits numerical
 softening. 
 Contact calculations accounting for shell or membrane thicknesses (which
 is not allowed with the finite-sliding, node-to-surface formulation). 
 User-specified initial contact clearances (see 
 Additional Contact Initialization Options for Small-Sliding Contact in Abaqus/Standard ).
 Various usages of special-purpose contact elements, such as tube-to-tube
 contact elements (see 
 Contact Modeling with Elements 
 and 
 Tube-to-Tube Contact Elements ),
 result in some normal distance between nodes that interact with each other. 
 While undesirable, the net moment that sometimes occurs with node-to-surface
 contact constraints is typically not significantly detrimental to the analysis
 results. 
 Effect of the Contact Discretization Method on Solution Cost 
 There is no easy way to predict which contact discretization method will
 result in lower overall solution cost. Basic trends include: 
 Node-to-surface contact discretization tends to be less costly per
 iteration than surface-to-surface contact discretization (because
 surface-to-surface contact discretization generally involves more nodes per
 constraint). 
 Contact conditions with finite-sliding contact tend to converge in fewer
 iterations with surface-to-surface contact discretization than with
 node-to-surface contact discretization (because surface-to-surface contact
 discretization has more continuous behavior upon sliding). 
 Using the Finite-Sliding Tracking Approach 
 The finite-sliding tracking approach allows for arbitrary separation,
 sliding, and rotation of the surfaces. 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 contact pairs use a finite-sliding, node-to-surface contact formulation by
 default. General contact in 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 always uses a finite-sliding, surface-to-surface contact formulation. 
 Example 
 Consider the case shown in Figure 5 , with surface ASURF acting as the secondary surface to
 surface BSURF in a finite-sliding, node-to-surface
 contact pair. 
 Figure 5. Contacting bodies. 
 In this example secondary node 101 may come into contact anywhere along the main surface
 BSURF . While in contact, it is constrained to slide
 along BSURF , irrespective of the orientation and
 deformation of this surface. This behavior is possible because Abaqus/Standard tracks the position of node 101 relative to the main surface
 BSURF as the bodies deform. Figure 6 shows the possible evolution of the contact between node 101 and its main surface
 BSURF . 
 Figure 6. Trajectory of node 101 in finite-sliding contact. 
 Node 101 is in contact with the element face with end nodes 201 and 202 at
 time t 1 .
 The load transfer at this time occurs between node 101 and nodes 201 and 202
 only. Later on, at time t 2 ,
 node 101 may find itself in contact with the element face with end nodes 501
 and 502. Then the load transfer will occur between node 101 and nodes 501 and
 502. 
 Path-Based Versus State-Based Tracking Algorithms 
 Brief descriptions of the tracking algorithms available in 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 are provided below so that you can be aware of their characteristics and
 available options. 
 Path-Based Tracking Algorithm 
 The “path-based” tracking algorithm carefully considers the relative paths of points on the
 secondary surface with respect to the main surface within each increment and allows for
 double-sided shell and membrane main surfaces. The path-based tracking algorithm is
 available only for finite-sliding, surface-to-surface contact interactions involving
 element-based main surfaces and is the default for those interactions. The path-based
 algorithm is sometimes more effective than the state-based algorithm for analyses
 involving self-contact or large incremental relative motion. Input File Usage Use the
 following option to specify use of the path-based tracking algorithm: CONTACT PAIR , INTERACTION = interaction_property_name , TYPE = SURFACE TO SURFACE , TRACKING = PATH 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage Interaction module: surface-to-surface contact or self-contact interaction editor: Discretization method : Surface to surface , Contact tracking : Two configurations (path) 
 State-Based Tracking Algorithm 
 The “state-based” tracking algorithm updates the tracking state based on the tracking state
 associated with the beginning of the increment together with geometric information
 associated with the predicted configuration. This algorithm is well-suited for most
 finite-sliding analyses but requires the use of single-sided surfaces and occasionally
 has difficulty tracking large incremental motion. State-based tracking may miss
 detecting contact if the incremental relative motion exceeds the dimensions of the main
 surface or if the incremental motion cuts across corners of the main surface; specifying
 an upper bound for the increment size helps avoid these problems. The state-based
 tracking algorithm is: 
 the only tracking algorithm available for finite-sliding,
 node-to-surface contact pairs; 
 the only tracking algorithm available for finite-sliding contact interactions involving an
 analytical rigid main surface; 
 a non-default option for finite-sliding, surface-to-surface contact pairs involving an
 element-based main surface. 
 Input File Usage Use the
 following option to specify use of the state-based tracking algorithm: CONTACT PAIR , INTERACTION = interaction_property_name , TYPE = SURFACE TO SURFACE , TRACKING = STATE 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage Interaction module: surface-to-surface contact or self-contact interaction editor: Discretization method : Surface to surface , Contact tracking : Single configuration (state) 
 Smoothing Main Surfaces for the Finite-Sliding, Node-to-Surface Formulation 
 The finite-sliding, node-to-surface contact formulation requires that main surfaces have
 continuous surface normals at all points. Convergence problems can result if main surfaces
 that do not have continuous surface normals are used in finite-sliding, node-to-surface
 contact analyses; secondary nodes tend to get “stuck” at points where the main surface
 normals are discontinuous. Abaqus/Standard automatically smooths the surface normals of element-based main surfaces (see Smoothing Deformable Main Surfaces and Rigid Surfaces Defined with Rigid Elements below) used in finite-sliding, node-to-surface contact simulations, including those
 modeled with slide lines. You are expected to create smooth analytical rigid surfaces (see
 Analytical Rigid Surface Definition ). No such
 smoothing of main surface normals is needed with the finite-sliding, surface-to-surface
 formulation. 
 Smoothing Deformable Main Surfaces and Rigid Surfaces Defined with Rigid Elements 
 For finite-sliding, node-to-surface contact simulations with planar or axisymmetric deformable
 main surfaces, Abaqus/Standard will smooth any discontinuous transitions between two first-order element faces with
 parabolic curves. Discontinuous transitions between two second-order element faces are
 smoothed with cubic curves connecting two points located on the element's faces. This
 smoothing is shown in Figure 7 for first-order elements (linear segments) and in Figure 8 for second-order elements (parabolic segments). For finite-sliding, node-to-surface
 simulations with three-dimensional deformable main surfaces and rigid main surfaces
 using rigid elements, Abaqus/Standard will smooth any discontinuous surface normal transitions between the main surface
 facets. 
 Figure 7. Smoothing between linear segments. 
 Figure 8. Smoothing between quadratic segments. 
 You can control the degree of smoothing of the main surface in node-to-surface contact
 simulations or in analyses using slide lines and contact elements by specifying a
 fraction f . The default value of f is 0.2. 
 For planar or axisymmetric deformable main surfaces, 
 f 
 = 
 a 
 1 
 / 
 ℓ 
 1 
 = 
 a 
 2 
 / 
 ℓ 
 2 
 , where 
 ℓ 
 1 
 and 
 ℓ 
 2 
 are the lengths of the element facets that join at the surface node
 and 
 f 
 < 
 0.5 
 (see Figure 7 and Figure 8 ). Abaqus/Standard will construct either a parabolic or a cubic segment between two points at distances 
 a 
 1 
 and 
 a 
 2 
 from the node at which the discontinuity exists; this smoothed segment
 will be used in the contact calculations. Thus, the contact surface will differ from the
 faceted element geometry. Smoothing affects only segments where the normal to the
 deformable main surface is discontinuous at the node joining two elements: it does not
 affect the two segments adjacent to the midside nodes on second-order element faces. 
 For three-dimensional, element-based main surfaces, f is defined as a
 fraction of the dimension of a facet as shown in Figure 9 . The normal vector of a point within the region bounded by the dashed lines is
 computed to be normal to the facet. Outside this region the normal is smoothed with
 respect to the adjacent facets, using a generalization of the two-dimensional approach
 shown in Figure 7 and Figure 8 . The physical geometry of a three-dimensional facet is not smoothed; only the surface
 normal definitions associated with the facet are affected by the smoothing operation.
 The implementation of the normal-direction smoothing algorithm is slightly different for
 surfaces based on rigid type elements (see Rigid Elements ) than other
 element types. This difference typically has minimal effect on the convergence behavior
 or solution results; however, for example, different solution behavior may occasionally
 be observed between otherwise identical analyses in which a rigid body is modeled with
 R3D4 elements in one case and
 S4R elements assigned to a rigid body in
 another case. 
 Figure 9. Smoothing of a three-dimensional main surface. 
 Input File Usage Use the
 following option for node-to-surface contact simulations: CONTACT PAIR , INTERACTION = interaction_property_name , SMOOTH = f Use the following option when using slide lines and contact
 elements: SLIDE LINE , ELSET = name , SMOOTH = f 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage Interaction module: Interaction Create : Surface-to-surface contact (Standard) or Self-contact (Standard) : Degree of smoothing for main surface: f 
 Smoothing a Deformable Main Surface along Symmetry Edges 
 When a two-dimensional or axisymmetric deformable main surface ends at a symmetry plane and
 node-to-surface discretization is used, Abaqus/Standard will smooth and calculate the proper surface normals and tangent planes of the end
 segment if the boundary condition at the symmetry end is specified with the symmetry
 “type” boundary XSYMM or
 YSYMM . This smoothing procedure is accomplished by
 reflecting the end segment about the symmetry plane and constructing either a parabolic
 or a cubic segment between the end segment and the reflected segment. Thus, the contact
 surface may differ from the faceted element geometry near the end. Abaqus/Standard will automatically adjust the surface normal and tangent planes at 
 r 
 = 
 0 
 of an axisymmetric main surface regardless of whether a symmetry
 boundary condition is defined. The finite-sliding, surface-to-surface formulation has no
 special treatment for surfaces ending at a symmetry plane. See Modifying the Main Surface Normals for a discussion of how the small-sliding, node-to-surface formulation treats main
 surfaces ending at a symmetry plane. See Small-Sliding, Surface-to-Surface Contact for a
 discussion of how the small-sliding, node-to-surface formulation treats secondary
 surfaces ending at a symmetry plane. 
 Overriding the Default Smoothing Behavior for Finite-Sliding, Node-to-Surface Contact 
 To model a main surface with corners in two dimensions (fold lines in three dimensions), break
 the surface into multiple surfaces. This technique prevents Abaqus/Standard from smoothing out the corners or fold lines and allows Abaqus/Standard to introduce constraints associated with each surface if a secondary node is in
 contact with an interior corner or fold in the main surface. 
 To accurately model the main surface with a corner shown in Figure 10 , you must define two contact pairs: the first contact pair has
 ASURF as the secondary surface and
 BSURFA as the main surface; the second contact pair
 has ASURF as the secondary surface and
 BSURFB as the main surface. 
 Figure 10. main surface with a corner. 
 Finite Sliding in a Geometrically Linear Analysis 
 Finite-sliding simulations usually include nonlinear geometric effects
 because such simulations generally involve large deformations and large
 rotations. However, it is also possible to use the finite-sliding tracking
 approach in a geometrically linear analysis (see 
 Geometric Nonlinearity ).
 The load transfer paths between the surfaces and the contact direction are
 updated in finite-sliding, geometrically linear analyses. This capability is
 useful for analyzing finite sliding between two stiff bodies that do not
 undergo large rotations. 
 Unsymmetric Terms in Finite-Sliding Contact Simulations 
 Normal contact constraints due to node-to-surface discretization produce unsymmetric terms in the
 system of equations when three-dimensional faceted surfaces come in contact. These terms
 have a strong effect on the convergence rate in regions on the main surfaces with large
 differences in surface normals between facets. 
 Normal contact constraints due to surface-to-surface discretization produce unsymmetric terms in
 both two- and three-dimensional cases. These terms have a strong effect on the convergence
 rate in regions where the main and secondary surfaces are not parallel to each other. 
 In both cases you should use the unsymmetric solution scheme for the step to
 improve the convergence rate of the simulation (see 
 Matrix Storage and Solution Scheme in Abaqus/Standard ).
 Contact simulations that involve strong frictional effects can also produce
 unsymmetric terms. See 
 Unsymmetric Terms in the System of Equations 
 for details. 
 Using the Small-Sliding Tracking Approach 
 For a large class of contact problems the general tracking of the finite-sliding approach is
 unnecessary, even though geometric nonlinearity may need to be considered. Abaqus/Standard provides a small-sliding tracking approach for such problems. For geometrically nonlinear
 analyses this formulation assumes that the surfaces may undergo arbitrarily large rotations
 but that a secondary node will interact with the same local area of the main surface
 throughout the analysis. For geometrically linear analyses the small-sliding approach
 reduces to an infinitesimal-sliding and rotation approach, in which it is assumed that both
 the relative motion of the surfaces and the absolute motion of the contacting bodies are
 small. 
 Abaqus/Standard attempts to associate a planar approximation of the main surface with each secondary node
 of a small-sliding contact pair. Contact interactions are considered between a given
 secondary node (or region nearby a given secondary node for the surface-to-surface
 formulation) and the associated local tangent plane. An example for the small-sliding,
 node-to-surface formulation is shown in Figure 11 (for example, the secondary node is typically constrained not to penetrate this local
 tangent plane). Each local tangent plane, which is a line in two dimensions, is defined by
 an anchor point, 
 X 
 0 
 , on the main surface and an orientation vector at the anchor point (see
 Figure 11 ). 
 Figure 11. Definition of the anchor point and local tangent plane used by the
 small-sliding, node-to-surface formulation for node 103. 
 The algorithm used to define anchor points is described below. If an anchor point cannot be
 determined for a particular secondary node, no contact constraint will be enforced for that
 secondary node. 
 Having a local tangent plane for each secondary node means that for the small-sliding tracking
 approach Abaqus/Standard does not have to monitor secondary nodes for possible contact along the entire main
 surface. Therefore, small-sliding contact is generally less expensive computationally than
 finite-sliding contact. The cost savings are often most dramatic in three-dimensional
 contact problems. 
 Small-Sliding, Node-to-Surface Contact 
 For node-to-surface contact Abaqus/Standard chooses the anchor point of a secondary node's local tangent plane such that the vector
 from the anchor point to the secondary node coincides with a smoothly varying normal
 vector on the main surface. The anchor point is chosen before the analysis starts using
 the initial configuration of the model. 
 Smoothly Varying Main Surface Normals 
 The algorithm requires that the main surface have a smoothly varying normal vector 
 N 
 ⁢ 
 ( 
 x 
 ) 
 , where 
 x 
 is any point on the main surface. The first step in defining 
 N 
 ⁢ 
 ( 
 x 
 ) 
 is to construct the unit normal vectors at each node of the main
 surface. Abaqus/Standard forms these nodal normals by averaging the normals of the element faces making up the
 main surface; only the element faces in the surface definition will contribute to the
 nodal normals and, thus, to 
 N 
 ⁢ 
 ( 
 x 
 ) 
 . Abaqus/Standard uses the initial nodal coordinates to compute these normals. 
 Figure 11 shows the nodal unit normals for a main surface, the anchor point 
 X 
 0 
 , and the local tangent plane associated with secondary node 103. Abaqus/Standard uses the nodal unit normals 
 N 
 2 
 and 
 N 
 3 
 , along with the shape functions of the element containing the two
 nodes, to construct 
 N 
 ⁢ 
 ( 
 x 
 ) 
 on the 2–3 element face. Abaqus/Standard chooses the anchor point 
 X 
 0 
 of the local tangent plane for node 103 so that 
 N 
 ⁢ 
 ( 
 X 
 0 
 ) 
 passes through node 103. 
 N 
 ⁢ 
 ( 
 X 
 0 
 ) 
 is the contact direction for secondary node 103 and defines the
 orientation of the local tangent plane. In this example, as in many cases, the local
 tangent plane is only an approximation of the actual mesh geometry. 
 Modifying the Main Surface Normals 
 Defining user-specified nodal normals on the main surface (see Normal Definitions at Nodes ) will
 improve the local tangent planes calculated for the small-sliding, node-to-surface
 formulation in some cases. For example, a default nodal normal corresponding to an
 average normal among adjacent facets can cause significant deviation from the true
 surface normal direction at perimeter nodes, as shown in Figure 12 . The nodal normal 
 N 
 1 
 does not point along the symmetry plane, which means that secondary
 node 100 will never intersect the main surface. In a small-sliding problem if a
 secondary node fails to intersect the main surface at the start of the analysis, it will
 be free to penetrate the main surface because no local tangent plane will be formed. 
 Figure 12. Main surface normal at node 1 in a small-sliding model of concentric cylinders. With the
 default 
 N 
 1 
 secondary node 100 will never contact
 CSURF . 
 Defining a user-specified normal (1.00E+00, 0.00E+00, 0.00E+00) at node 1 on the main surface
 CSURF will correct the problem, as shown in Figure 13 . This method allows secondary node 100 to see the main surface, and the correct
 contact normal direction will be used. Main surface normals at perimeter nodes are
 adjusted automatically to lie along the symmetry plane if boundary conditions are
 specified at these nodes in symmetry “type” format
 ( XSYMM , YSYMM , or
 ZSYMM —see Boundary Conditions ). 
 Figure 13. The modified main surface normal at node 1 of CSURF now
 allows secondary node 100 to contact CSURF . 
 Small-Sliding, Surface-to-Surface Contact 
 A key difference with the surface-to-surface approach is that more than one secondary node is
 involved in each contact constraint (except when the secondary surface is based on gasket
 elements, as discussed below). This is related to the fact that the surface-to-surface
 formulation enforces contact conditions in an average sense over regions nearby secondary
 nodes rather than only at individual secondary nodes (see Surface-to-Surface Contact Discretization above). The
 small-sliding, surface-to-surface contact formulation is a limit case of the
 finite-sliding, surface-to-surface formulation, using a planar approximation of the main
 surface per averaging region of the secondary surface. The constraint participation
 factors for the secondary nodes remain constant for small-sliding contact. The effective
 center-of-action on the secondary surface per contact constraint may differ slightly from
 the location of the predominant secondary node associated with the constraint. 
 A special version of the small-sliding, surface-to-surface formulation is used if the secondary
 surface is based on gasket elements to avoid a tendency to trigger unstable deformation
 modes in the gasket elements. This special formulation has only one secondary node per
 contact constraint and preserves the accuracy advantages of the surface-to-surface
 formulation, but it is not well-suited for extension to finite-sliding and is otherwise
 not as generally applicable as the regular small-sliding, surface-to-surface formulation.
 (The finite-sliding, surface-to-surface formulation always uses multiple secondary nodes
 per constraint and is not recommended for contact involving gasket elements.) 
 The small-sliding, surface-to-surface contact formulation determines main anchor points and
 normal directions in a manner similar to that used by the small-sliding, node-to-surface
 contact formulation; however, there are some differences. For the surface-to-surface
 approach the anchor point approximately corresponds to the center of the zone on the main
 surface where the averaging region of the secondary projects onto the main surface. This
 projection occurs along the secondary surface normal direction. This method does not make
 use of smoothed main surface nodal normals. The anchor point location typically does not
 depend significantly on whether node-to-surface or surface-to-surface discretization is
 used, unless the surfaces are significantly separated and non-parallel in the initial
 configuration (in which case small-sliding contact may not be appropriate). 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 automatically reverts to the node-to-surface approach for individual
 small-sliding contact constraints in the following circumstances, even if you
 have specified use of the surface-to-surface approach: 
 if the secondary surface is a node-based surface; 
 if the projection along the secondary surface normal direction does not intersect the main
 surface (but an anchor point can be found using the interpolated main surface normal
 direction algorithm discussed above for the small-sliding, node-to-surface
 formulation); or 
 if single-sided secondary and main surfaces have surface normals in approximately the same
 direction. 
 For constraints based on surface-to-surface discretization it is not necessary that the
 constraint associated with a node on a symmetry plane is parallel to the symmetry plane.
 Hence, there is usually no need to specify specific normal directions. As in the case of
 node-to-surface contact, the contact direction points from the anchor point to the
 secondary node, and the tangent plane is normal to this direction. The contact normal for
 the small-sliding, surface-to-surface formulation is adjusted automatically to lie along
 the symmetry plane for each secondary node that has a boundary condition specified in
 symmetry “type” format ( XSYMM ,
 YSYMM , or ZSYMM —see
 Boundary Conditions ). 
 Orientation of Local Tangent Planes 
 The local tangent plane is by definition orthogonal to the contact
 direction. You can override the default contact direction to specify a
 direction with a spatially varying clearance or overclosure definition (see 
 Specifying the Surface Normal for the Contact Calculations ).
 Once the contact direction is defined, the orientation of the local tangent plane with respect to
 the main surface facet remains fixed. Because small-sliding contact considers nonlinear
 geometric effects, Abaqus/Standard continuously updates the orientation of the local tangent plane to account for the
 rotation and, assuming that the main surface is deformable, the deformation of the main
 surface. The position of the anchor point relative to the surrounding nodes on the main
 surface facet does not change as the main surface deforms. 
 Load Transfer 
 In a small-sliding analysis each constraint can transfer load only to a limited number of nodes
 on the main surface. These nodes on the main surface are chosen based on their initial
 proximity to the anchor point. The magnitude of load transferred to each main surface node
 is based on proximity in the current, deformed configuration to the center-of-action on
 the secondary surface (which corresponds to a secondary node for the node-to-surface
 formulation). For example, in Figure 11 node 103 transmits load to both nodes 2 and 3 on the main surface if node-to-surface
 discretization is used (if surface-to-surface discretization is used, load may be
 transmitted to additional nearby main nodes). Thus, if node 103 contacts the local tangent
 plane, a larger share of the force would be transmitted to the main surface node, 2 or 3,
 closer to the secondary node. 
 When the anchor point 
 X 
 0 
 corresponds to a node on the main surface, as is the case with secondary
 node 104 and main surface node 3 in Figure 11 , the transmitted load for node-to-surface contact is shared by the node at 
 X 
 0 
 and all of the main surface nodes that share an adjacent surface facet
 with that node (additional main nodes may take part in the load transfer for
 surface-to-surface contact). In Figure 11 the three main surface nodes sharing the force transmitted by secondary node 104 are
 nodes 2, 3, and 4. 
 As the center-of-action on the secondary surface for a constraint slides along its local tangent
 plane, Abaqus/Standard updates the distribution among the main surface nodes. However, no additional main
 surface nodes are ever added to the original list of nodes associated with a given
 small-sliding constraint. The constraint will continue to transmit load to the original
 list of main surface nodes, regardless of the sliding distance. Figure 14 shows the potential problem that arises if small sliding is used but the relative
 tangential motion of the surfaces is not “small.” It shows the possible evolution of
 contact between secondary node 101 in Figure 5 and its main surface BSURF . Using the unit normal
 vectors 
 N 
 201 
 and 
 N 
 202 
 , the anchor point 
 X 
 0 
 is found for secondary node 101; for the purposes of this example,
 assume that it lies at the midpoint of the 201–202 face. With this location of 
 X 
 0 
 the local tangent plane for node 101 is parallel with the 201–202 face.
 The load transfer always occurs between node 101 and nodes 201 and 202, no matter how far
 node 101 slides along the local tangent plane. Therefore, if node 101 moves as shown in
 Figure 14 , it will continue to transmit load to nodes 201 and 202 when, in fact, it really slid
 off the mesh forming the main surface BSURF . 
 Figure 14. Excessive sliding in a small-sliding contact analysis. 
 What Can Be Considered Small Sliding 
 A contact pair in a small-sliding contact simulation should not grossly
 violate any of the assumptions or limitations outlined above. Adhere to the
 following guidelines: 
 Secondary nodes should slide less than an element length from their corresponding anchor point
 and still be contacting their local tangent plane. If the main surface is highly
 curved, the secondary nodes should slide only a fraction of an element length. The
 accumulated slip at a secondary node
 ( CSLIP ) can provide a good estimate
 of how far a secondary node has moved. 
 The local tangent planes formed by Abaqus/Standard should be a good approximation of the mesh geometry; if necessary, define a
 user-specified normal ( Normal Definitions at Nodes ) to
 improve the smoothly varying main surface normal, 
 N 
 ⁢ 
 ( 
 x 
 ) 
 . 
 The rotation and deformation of the main surface should not cause the local tangent planes to
 become a poor representation of the main surface during the course of the analysis. 
 Choosing the Main and Secondary Surfaces in Small-Sliding Problems 
 The basic guidelines given in About Contact Pairs in Abaqus/Standard should still be followed
 in a small-sliding simulation—the secondary surface should be the more refined surface or
 the surface on the more deformable body. However, in a small-sliding simulation more
 thought must be given when defining the main surface. With small-sliding contact each
 secondary node views the main surface as a flat surface, which can be significantly
 different than the true shape of the surface, even in the local region near the anchor
 point. In some cases the local tangent planes provide a good local approximation to the
 main surface in the initial configuration, but deformation and rotation of the main
 surface can reorient the local tangent planes such that they become a poor representation
 of the main surface. Figure 15 shows an example where distortion of the main surface results in such a situation. 
 Figure 15. Main surface deformation in a small-sliding contact analysis can cause problems with the
 local tangent planes. 
 This problem can be minimized to some extent by using a more refined mesh on the main surface,
 thus providing more element faces to control the motion of the tangent planes. Excessive
 mesh refinement should not be necessary since only small sliding should occur. 
 Infinitesimal Sliding 
 As was mentioned before, the small-sliding tracking approach reduces to an infinitesimal-sliding
 tracking approach for geometrically linear analyses. Infinitesimal sliding assumes that
 both the relative motions of the surfaces and the absolute motions of the model remain
 small. The orientations of the local tangent planes are not updated, and the load transfer
 paths and the weightings assigned to each main surface node remain constant during an
 infinitesimal-sliding simulation. 
 As in the case of small sliding, you can choose between node-to-surface and
 surface-to-surface discretizations with the infinitesimal-sliding tracking
 approach. The same user interface applies, and the default is node-to-surface
 discretization. 
 Local Tangent Directions on a Surface 
 Local tangent directions on a contact surface are a reference orientation by
 which 
 Abaqus 
 calculates tangential behavior in a contact interaction. 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 calculates the initial orientation of the two local tangent directions by
 default. The local tangent directions rotate with the contact surface in a
 geometrically nonlinear analysis. 
 Calculating the Initial Local Tangent Directions for a Two-Dimensional Surface 
 Two-dimensional and standard axisymmetric models have only one local tangent
 direction, t 1 .
 Abaqus/Standard 
 defines the orientation of this direction by the cross product of the vector
 into the plane of the model (0., 0., 1.0) and the contact normal vector. 
 Models consisting of generalized axisymmetric bodies have a second local tangent direction, 
 t 
 2 
 , to account for the component of slip associated with relative
 differences in circumferential twist between contacting bodies. The first local tangent
 direction at any point on the surface is always tangent to the main surface in the local
 r – z plane. The second local tangent direction
 is orthogonal to this plane in the local circumferential direction. For more information
 about generalized axisymmetric models, see Generalized Axisymmetric Stress/Displacement Elements with Twist . 
 Calculating the Initial Local Tangent Directions for a Three-Dimensional Surface 
 By default, 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 determines the initial orientation of the two local tangent directions,
 t 1 
 and t 2 ,
 using the following conventions: 
 Finite-sliding, surface-to-surface
formulation 
 The default initial orientations of the two local tangent directions are based on the secondary
 surface normal, using the standard convention for calculating surface tangents (see
 Conventions ) with
 the assumption that the contact normal corresponds to the negative normal to the
 secondary surface. Finite-sliding,
node-to-surface formulation 
 For contact involving a secondary surface based on three-dimensional beam-type elements, the
 first and second local tangent directions are defined along the length of the beam
 and transverse to the beam, respectively. For contact involving an analytical rigid
 surface and a secondary surface that is not based on three-dimensional beam-type
 elements, the first local tangent direction is tangential to the cross-section used
 to generate the analytical rigid surface, and the second local tangent direction is
 orthogonal to the plane of the cross-section in which the contact occurs. 
 In other cases, default initial orientations of the two local tangent directions are calculated
 by first computing tentative 
 t 
 1 
 and 
 t 
 2 
 directions. For element-based secondary surfaces the tentative
 directions are based on the secondary surface using the standard convention for
 calculating surface tangents. For node-based secondary surfaces the tentative 
 t 
 1 
 and 
 t 
 2 
 directions are set at each node to coincide with the global
 x - and y -axes, respectively. Abaqus constructs an orthogonal triad of 
 t 
 1 
 , 
 t 
 2 
 , and 
 n 
 (where 
 n 
 = 
 t 
 1 
 × 
 t 
 2 
 ), then rotates this triad such that 
 n 
 becomes aligned with the main surface normal at the tracked point
 on the main surface. Small-sliding,
surface-to-surface formulation 
 The default initial orientations of the two local tangent directions are based on the main
 surface normal, using the standard convention for calculating surface tangents. Small-sliding,
node-to-surface formulation 
 The default initial orientations of the two local tangent directions are calculated at each point
 on the main surface based on the main surface normal, using the standard convention
 for calculating surface tangents. 
 Defining Alternative Initial Local Tangent Directions for Contact Pair Surfaces 
 If the default local tangent directions are not convenient to prescribe an
 anisotropic friction model or to view contact output, you can define the local
 tangent directions for three-dimensional contact pair surfaces. You cannot
 redefine the local tangent directions for the following types of surfaces: 
 Surfaces in a general contact domain 
 Analytical rigid surfaces 
 Two-dimensional surfaces 
 You define the local tangent directions by associating an orientation definition (see Orientations ) with a
 contact pair surface. You can assign an orientation only to one surface of a contact pair.
 The surface on which an orientation can be defined is the same surface on which the
 default orientation would be calculated (see the conventions given previously). For
 example, an orientation can be defined only on the secondary surface in deformable versus
 deformable finite-sliding contact. If a second orientation is also given, an error message
 is issued. Therefore, it is not possible to redefine the local tangent directions for
 finite-sliding contact between a deformable secondary surface and an analytical rigid
 surface. 
 An orientation that is defined on a secondary surface of a contact pair that is generated from
 three-dimensional truss-type elements or from a list of nodes without rotational degree of
 freedoms will not be rotated if the secondary surface undergoes finite motion. In this
 case a warning message is issued during input processing. Input File Usage CONTACT PAIR , INTERACTION = interaction_property_name 
 secondary surface name , main surface name , orientation for secondary surface 
 secondary surface name , main surface name , , orientation for main surface 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage You cannot define alternative
local tangent directions for contact pairs in 
 Abaqus/CAE . 
 Evolution of the Local Tangent Directions 
 For geometrically nonlinear analyses the local tangent directions rotate with the surface on
 which these directions were initially calculated or redefined using an orientation
 definition as described above with the exception that the local tangent direction rotates
 with the main surface for the small-sliding, surface-to-surface formulation. These rotated
 local tangent directions are further rotated to ensure that the normal vector, computed
 using the cross product of the rotated local tangent directions, corresponds to the normal
 vector on the main surface when the secondary node comes into contact.