Contact Constraint Enforcement Methods in Abaqus/Standard 
 Contact Constraint Enforcement Methods in Abaqus/Standard 
 Contact constraint enforcement methods in 
 Abaqus/Standard :
 are specified as part of the surface interaction definition; 
 determine how contact constraints imposed by a physical
 pressure-overclosure relationship (see 
 Contact Pressure-Overclosure Relationships )
 are resolved numerically in an analysis; 
 can either strictly enforce or approximate the physical
 pressure-overclosure relationships; 
 can be modified to resolve convergence difficulties due to
 overconstraints; and 
 sometimes utilize Lagrange multiplier degrees of freedom. 
 The available constraint enforcement methods for normal contact in 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 are discussed in detail in this section. The frictional constraint enforcement
 methods in 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 are assigned independently of those for the normal contact constraints and are
 discussed in 
 Frictional Behavior .
 The use of Lagrange multipliers in contact calculations is also covered in this
 section. 
 This page discusses: Available Constraint Enforcement Methods in Abaqus/Standard Direct Method Penalty Method Augmented Lagrange Method Use of Lagrange Multiplier Degrees of Freedom by the Various Methods 
 See Also About General Contact in Abaqus/Standard About Contact Pairs in Abaqus/Standard About Mechanical Contact Properties Contact Pressure-Overclosure Relationships In Other Guides *SURFACE BEHAVIOR *CONTACT CONTROLS Defining general contact Defining surface-to-surface contact Defining a contact interaction property 
 Products Abaqus/Standard Abaqus/CAE 
 Available Constraint Enforcement Methods in Abaqus/Standard 
 There are three contact constraint enforcement methods available in 
 Abaqus/Standard :
 The direct method attempts to strictly enforce a given
 pressure-overclosure behavior per constraint, without approximation or use of
 augmentation iterations. 
 The penalty method is a stiff approximation of hard contact. 
 The augmented Lagrange method uses the same kind of stiff approximation
 as the penalty method, but also uses augmentation iterations to improve the
 accuracy of the approximation. 
 The default constraint enforcement method depends on interaction
 characteristics, as follows: 
 The penalty method is used by default for finite-sliding, surface-to-surface contact if a
 hard pressure-overclosure relationship is in effect. For general
 contact, both the small- and finite-sliding tracking approaches use the penalty method
 by default. 
 The augmented Lagrange method is used by default for three-dimensional
 self-contact with node-to-surface discretization if a hard 
 pressure-overclosure relationship is in effect. 
 The direct method is the default in all other cases. 
 You should consider the following factors when choosing the contact
 enforcement method: 
 The direct method must be used for contact pairs with a
 softened pressure-overclosure relationship (see 
 Contact Pressure-Overclosure Relationships ).
 The direct method strictly enforces the specified pressure-overclosure
 behavior consistent with the constraint formulation 
 The penalty or augmented Lagrange constraint enforcement methods
 sometimes provide more efficient solutions (generally due to reduced
 calculation costs per iteration and a lower number of overall iterations per
 analysis) at some (typically small) sacrifice in solution accuracy. See the
 discussions of the penalty and augmented Lagrange methods below. 
 Overconstraints due to overlapping contact definitions or the
 combination of contact and other constraint types (see 
 Overconstraint Checks )
 should be avoided for directly enforced hard contact. 
 Direct Method 
 The direct method strictly enforces a given pressure-overclosure behavior
 for each constraint, without approximation or use of augmentation iterations. 
 Input File Usage Use both of the
following options: SURFACE INTERACTION , NAME = interaction_property_name 
 SURFACE BEHAVIOR , DIRECT 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage Interaction module: contact property editor: Mechanical Normal Behavior : Constraint enforcement method : Direct (Standard) 
 Direct Method for Hard Pressure-Overclosure Behavior 
 The direct method can be used to strictly enforce a “hard”
 pressure-overclosure relationship. Lagrange multipliers are always used in this
 case. 
 Direct Method for Softened Pressure-Overclosure Relationships 
 The direct method is the only method that can be used to enforce “softened”
 pressure-overclosure relationships. The direct method can be used to model
 softened contact behavior regardless of the type of contact formulation;
 however, modeling stiff interface behavior with a contact formulation that is
 prone to overconstraints can be difficult. Lagrange multipliers are used if the
 slope of the pressure-overclosure curve exceeds 1000 times the underlying
 element stiffness (as computed by 
 Abaqus/Standard );
 otherwise, the constraints are enforced without Lagrange multipliers. The usage
 of Lagrange multipliers, thus, depends on the contact pressure. Softened
 pressure-overclosure relationships are discussed in more detail in 
 Contact Pressure-Overclosure Relationships .
 Limitations of the Direct Method 
 Because of its strict interpretation of contact constraints, hard contact
 simulations utilizing the direct enforcement method are susceptible to
 overconstraint issues. As a result, directly enforced hard contact is not
 available for contact pairs defined using three-dimensional self-contact with
 node-to-surface discretization. In this instance you can use an alternate
 enforcement method or the direct method with a softened pressure-overclosure
 relationship. 
 You may experience similar overconstraint problems with symmetric main-secondary contact pairs
 (see Using Symmetric Main-Secondary Contact Pairs to Improve Contact Modeling ). Although
 directly enforced hard contact is the default for these contact pairs, it is recommended
 that you use an alternate enforcement method or a softened contact relationship. 
 Certain second-order element faces do not perform well in directly enforced
 hard contact relationships. See 
 Three-Dimensional Surfaces with Second-Order Faces and a Node-to-Surface Formulation 
 for details on this issue. 
 Penalty Method 
 The penalty method approximates hard pressure-overclosure behavior. With
 this method the contact force is proportional to the penetration distance, so
 some degree of penetration will occur. Advantages of the penalty method
 include: 
 Numerical softening associated with the penalty method can mitigate
 overconstraint issues and reduce the number of iterations required in an
 analysis. 
 The penalty method can be implemented such that no Lagrange multipliers
 are used, which allows for improved solver efficiency. 
 Choosing a Penalty Method 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 offers linear and nonlinear variations of the penalty method. With the linear
 penalty method the so-called penalty stiffness is constant, so the
 pressure-overclosure relationship is linear. With the nonlinear penalty method
 the penalty stiffness increases linearly between regions of constant low
 initial stiffness and constant high final stiffness, resulting in a nonlinear
 pressure-overclosure relationship. The default penalty method is linear. 
 A comparison of the linear and nonlinear pressure-overclosure relationships
 with the default settings is shown in 
 Figure 1 .
 Figure 1. Comparison of linear and nonlinear pressure-overclosure relationships
 in a general analysis with default settings. 
 Linear Penalty Method 
 When the linear penalty method is used, Abaqus/Standard will, by default, set the penalty stiffness to 10 times a representative underlying
 element stiffness. You can scale or reassign the penalty stiffness, as discussed in
 Modifying a Linear Penalty Stiffness below.
 Contact penetrations resulting from the default penalty stiffness will not significantly
 affect the results in most cases; however, these penetrations can sometimes contribute
 to some degree of stress inaccuracy (for example, with displacement-controlled loading
 and a coarse mesh). The linear penalty method is used by default for the finite-sliding,
 surface-to-surface contact formulation. The linear penalty method is also the default
 for general contact, irrespective of whether the small- or finite-sliding tracking
 approach applies to contact constraints. Input File Usage Use both of the
 following options to specify the linear penalty method: SURFACE INTERACTION , NAME = interaction_property_name 
 SURFACE BEHAVIOR , PENALTY = LINEAR 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage Interaction module: contact property editor: Mechanical Normal Behavior : Constraint enforcement method : Penalty (Standard) , Behavior : Linear 
 Nonlinear Penalty Method 
 With the nonlinear penalty method, the pressure-overclosure curve has four
 distinct regions shown in 
 Figure 2 .
 Figure 2. Nonlinear penalty pressure-overclosure relationship. 
 Inactive contact regime: The contact pressure remains zero for
 clearances greater than c 0 .
 The default setting of c 0 
 is zero. 
 Constant initial penalty stiffness regime: The contact pressure varies
 linearly, with a slope equal to K i 
 for penetrations (overclosures) in the range - c 0 
 to e .
 The default initial penalty stiffness, K i ,
 is equal to the representative underlying element stiffness. The default value
 of e 
 is 1% of a characteristic length computed by 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 to represent a typical facet size. 
 Stiffening regime: The contact pressure varies quadratically for
 penetrations in the range e 
 to d ,
 while the penalty stiffness increases linearly from K i 
 to K f .
 The default final penalty stiffness, K f ,
 is equal to 100 times the representative underlying element stiffness. The
 default value of d 
 is 3% of the same characteristic length used to compute
 e 
 (discussed above). 
 Constant final penalty stiffness regime: The contact pressure varies
 linearly, with a slope equal to K f 
 for penetrations greater than d .
 The low initial penalty stiffness typically results in better convergence
 of the Newton iterations and better robustness, while the higher final
 stiffness keeps the overclosure at an acceptable level as the contact pressure
 builds up. For linear perturbation procedures the default penalty stiffness is
 constant and equal to 100 times the representative underlying element
 stiffness, independent of the penalty stiffness used in the base state. Thus,
 it is equal to the constant final penalty stiffness. 
 Input File Usage Use both of the
 following options to specify the nonlinear penalty method: SURFACE INTERACTION , NAME = interaction_property_name 
 SURFACE BEHAVIOR , PENALTY = NONLINEAR 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage Interaction module: contact property editor: Mechanical Normal Behavior : Constraint enforcement method : Penalty (Standard) , Behavior : Nonlinear 
 Modifying the Penalty Stiffness 
 If you are interested in investigating the effects of modifying the penalty
 stiffness, it is generally recommended that you consider order-of-magnitude
 changes. Increasing the penalty stiffness above the threshold value discussed
 above will, by default, introduce Lagrange multipliers. 
 Modifying a Linear Penalty Stiffness 
 As part of the surface behavior definition, you can specify the linear
 penalty stiffness, shift the pressure-overclosure relationship by specifying
 the clearance at which the contact pressure is zero, or scale the default or
 specified penalty stiffness by a factor. 
 Input File Usage To modify the
 linear penalty behavior in the surface behavior definition: SURFACE BEHAVIOR , PENALTY = LINEAR 
 penalty stiffness , clearance at zero pressure , factor 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage To modify the linear penalty
 behavior in the surface behavior definition: Interaction module: contact property editor: Mechanical Normal Behavior : Constraint enforcement method: Penalty (Standard) , Behavior: Linear , Stiffness value: Specify: penalty stiffness , Stiffness scale factor: factor , Clearance at which contact pressure is zero: clearance at zero pressure 
 Modifying a Nonlinear Penalty Stiffness 
 As part of the surface behavior definition, you can specify the final
 nonlinear penalty stiffness, shift the pressure-overclosure relationship by
 specifying the clearance at which the contact pressure is zero, or scale the
 default or specified penalty stiffness by a factor. In addition, you can
 control directly the ratio of the initial to the final penalty stiffness, the
 scale factor, and the ratio that determines d 
 and e .
 Input File Usage To modify the
 nonlinear penalty behavior in the surface behavior definition: SURFACE BEHAVIOR , PENALTY = NONLINEAR 
 final penalty stiffness , clearance at zero pressure , factor , upper quadratic limit scale factor , ratio of initial penalty stiffness over final penalty stiffness , lower quadratic limit ratio 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage To modify the nonlinear
 penalty behavior in the surface behavior definition: Interaction module: contact property editor: Mechanical Normal Behavior : Constraint enforcement method: Penalty (Standard) , Behavior: Nonlinear , Maximum stiffness value: Specify: final penalty stiffness , Stiffness scale factor: factor , Initial/Final stiffness ratio: ratio of initial penalty stiffness over final penalty stiffness , Upper quadratic limit scale factor: upper quadratic limit scale factor , Lower quadratic limit ratio: lower quadratic limit ratio , Clearance at which contact pressure is zero: clearance at zero pressure 
 Scaling the Penalty Stiffness on a Step-by-Step Basis 
 You can also scale the penalty stiffness on a step-by-step basis, which
 will act as an additional multiplier on any scale factor specified as part of
 the surface behavior definition. 
 Input File Usage To scale the
 penalty stiffness on a step-by-step basis: CONTACT CONTROLS , STIFFNESS SCALE FACTOR = factor 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage To scale the penalty
 stiffness on a step-by-step basis: Interaction module: Abaqus/Standard contact controls editor: Augmented Lagrange : Stiffness scale factor: factor 
 Adjusting the Penalty Stiffness across Iterations of the First Increment 
 It is common to have convergence difficulties in the first increment of an
 analysis if the contact status changes over a large portion of the contact area
 upon initial loading. An approach that tends to improve convergence behavior
 without sacrificing accuracy is to use a reduced penalty stiffness in the early
 iterations of the first increment and return to the default penalty stiffness
 for the final iterations of the first increment and all iterations of
 subsequent increments. Use of a reduced penalty stiffness in early iterations
 helps to robustly find an approximate contact status distribution, and the goal
 of later iterations is to then find an accurate solution, which is reported as
 the converged solution for the first increment. 
 Input File Usage To scale the
 penalty stiffness within the first increment: CONTACT CONTROLS , STIFFNESS SCALE FACTOR = USER ADAPTIVE 
 Limitations of the Penalty Method 
 The penalty method cannot be used for debonded surfaces. 
 If the penalty method is specified, Lagrange multipliers are always used
 during analysis steps with the following procedures: 
 Design sensitivity analysis (see 
 Direct Design Sensitivity Analysis )
 Direct steady-state dynamic analysis (see 
 Direct-Solution Steady-State Dynamic Analysis )
 Quasi-Newton method (see 
 Convergence Criteria for Nonlinear Problems )
 If surface elements have been used to define a contact surface on the
 exterior of a substructure (see 
 Contact Modeling If Substructures Are Present ),
 Abaqus/Standard 
 interprets the underlying element stiffness to be zero. This can lead to
 difficulty in determining the default penalty stiffness and may cause numerical
 problems during the analysis. 
 Augmented Lagrange Method 
 The linear penalty method can be used within an augmentation iteration
 scheme that drives down the penetration distance. This so-called augmented
 Lagrange method applies only to hard pressure-overclosure relationships. The
 following describes the sequence that occurs in each increment with this
 approach: 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 finds a converged solution with the penalty method. 
 If a secondary node penetrates the main surface by more than a specified penetration tolerance,
 the contact pressure is “augmented” and another series of iterations is executed until
 convergence is once again achieved. 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 continues to augment the contact pressure and find the corresponding converged
 solution until the actual penetration is less than the penetration tolerance. 
 The augmented Lagrange method may require additional iterations in some
 cases; however, this approach can make the resolution of contact conditions
 easier and avoid problems with overconstraints, while keeping penetrations
 small. The augmented Lagrange method is used by default for three-dimensional
 self-contact using node-to-surface discretization. 
 The default penetration tolerance is one-tenth of a percent of the
 characteristic interface length except in the following cases: 
 if you specify a penalty stiffness scaling factor,
 f k 
 , of less than 1.0 (using the interface discussed below), 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 will automatically scale the default penetration tolerance by a factor of
 1 f k 
 (which will be greater than or equal to 1.0); 
 the default penetration tolerance for finite-sliding, surface-to-surface
 contact is five percent of the characteristic interface length, subject to the
 scaling discussed in the previous bullet point. 
 The default penalty stiffness for the augmented Lagrange method is 1000
 times the representative underlying element stiffness. Lagrange multipliers are
 used for the augmented Lagrange method if the penalty stiffness exceeds 1000
 times the representative underlying element stiffness computed by 
 Abaqus/Standard ;
 otherwise, no Lagrange multipliers are used. Therefore, Lagrange multipliers
 are not used for the augmented Lagrange method with the default penalty
 stiffness. 
 Input File Usage Use both of the
following options: SURFACE INTERACTION , NAME = interaction_property_name 
 SURFACE BEHAVIOR , AUGMENTED LAGRANGE 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage Interaction module: contact property editor: Mechanical Normal Behavior : Constraint enforcement method: Augmented Lagrange (Standard) 
 Modifying the Penetration Tolerance for the Augmented Lagrange Method 
 You can modify the penetration tolerance for the augmented Lagrange method
 on a step-by-step basis by specifying an absolute or relative penetration
 tolerance. The relative penetration tolerance is specified with respect to a
 characteristic length computed by 
 Abaqus/Standard .
 The default penetration tolerance was discussed above. The default penetration
 tolerance is increased automatically if you set the penalty stiffness scale
 factor to a value less than 1.0 (also discussed above); however, 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 will not adjust any directly specified penetration tolerance. Choosing a very
 small penetration tolerance may result in an excessive number of augmentation
 iterations. 
 Input File Usage To specify an
absolute penetration tolerance: CONTACT CONTROLS , ABSOLUTE PENETRATION TOLERANCE = tolerance To specify a relative penetration tolerance: CONTACT CONTROLS , RELATIVE PENETRATION TOLERANCE = tolerance 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage Interaction module: Abaqus/Standard contact controls editor: Augmented Lagrange : Penetration tolerance: Absolute: tolerance or Relative: tolerance 
 Modifying the Penalty Stiffness for the Augmented Lagrange Method 
 As with the penalty method, you can specify the penalty stiffness, shift the
 pressure-overclosure relationship by specifying the clearance at which the
 contact pressure is zero, or scale the default or specified penalty stiffness
 by a factor as part of the surface behavior definition. You can also scale the
 penalty stiffness on a step-by-step basis, which will act as an additional
 multiplier on any scale factor specified as part of the surface behavior
 definition. Choosing a very low penalty stiffness may result in an excessive
 number of augmentation iterations. 
 Input File Usage To modify the
penalty behavior in the surface behavior definition: SURFACE BEHAVIOR , AUGMENTED LAGRANGE 
 penalty stiffness , clearance at zero pressure , factor To scale the penalty stiffness on a step-by-step
basis: CONTACT CONTROLS , STIFFNESS SCALE FACTOR = factor 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage To modify the penalty
behavior in the surface behavior definition: Interaction module: contact property editor: Mechanical Normal Behavior : Constraint enforcement method: Augmented Lagrange (Standard) , Stiffness value: Specify: penalty stiffness , Stiffness scale factor: factor , Clearance at which contact pressure is zero: clearance at zero pressure To scale the penalty stiffness on a step-by-step
basis: Interaction module: Abaqus/Standard contact controls editor: Augmented Lagrange : Stiffness scale factor: factor 
 Modifying the Number of Allowed Augmentations for the Augmented Lagrange Method 
 You can define the number of allowed augmentations for the augmented
 Lagrange method. 
 Input File Usage CONTROLS , PARAMETERS = TIME INCREMENTATION 
 , , , , , , , , , , , , I A c 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage Defining the number of
allowed augmentations for the augmented Lagrange method is not supported in 
 Abaqus/CAE . 
 Limitations of the Augmented Lagrange Method 
 The augmented Lagrange method cannot be used for debonded surfaces. 
 If the augmented Lagrange method is specified, Lagrange multipliers are
 always used during analysis steps with the following procedures: 
 Design sensitivity analysis (see 
 Direct Design Sensitivity Analysis )
 Direct steady-state dynamic analysis (see 
 Direct-Solution Steady-State Dynamic Analysis )
 Quasi-Newton method (see 
 Convergence Criteria for Nonlinear Problems )
 If surface elements have been used to define a contact surface on the
 exterior of a substructure (see 
 Contact Modeling If Substructures Are Present ),
 Abaqus/Standard 
 interprets the underlying element stiffness to be zero. This can lead to
 difficulty in determining the default penalty stiffness and may cause numerical
 problems during the analysis. 
 Use of Lagrange Multiplier Degrees of Freedom by the Various Methods 
 Using Lagrange multipliers to enforce contact constraints can add
 significantly to the solution cost, but they also protect against numerical
 errors related to ill-conditioning that can occur if a high contact stiffness
 is in effect. 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 automatically chooses whether the constraint method makes use of Lagrange
 multipliers, based on a comparison of the contact stiffness to the underlying
 element stiffness. 
 Table 1 
 summarizes the use of Lagrange multipliers. Lagrange multipliers are not used
 for the default contact stiffnesses associated with the penalty and augmented
 Lagrange approximations of hard contact. Any Lagrange multipliers associated
 with contact are present only for active contact constraints, so the number of
 equations may change as the contact status changes. 
 Table 1. Use of Lagrange multipliers in constraint enforcement methods. 
 Constraint Method 
 Use Lagrange
 Multipliers 
 Yes 
 No 1 
 Direct, hard contact 
 Always 
 Never 
 Direct, exponential softened contact 
 If k > 1000 ⁢ k e 
 If k ≤ 1000 ⁢ k e 
 Direct, linear softened contact 
 If k > 1000 ⁢ k e 
 If k ≤ 1000 ⁢ k e 
 Direct, tabular softened contact 
 If k > 1000 ⁢ k e 
 If k ≤ 1000 ⁢ k e 
 Penalty, hard contact 
 If k p ⁢ e ⁢ n ⁢ a ⁢ l ⁢ t ⁢ y > 1000 ⁢ k e 
 If k p ⁢ e ⁢ n ⁢ a ⁢ l ⁢ t ⁢ y ≤ 1000 ⁢ k e 
 Augmented Lagrange, hard contact 
 If k p ⁢ e ⁢ n ⁢ a ⁢ l ⁢ t ⁢ y > 1000 ⁢ k e 
 If k p ⁢ e ⁢ n ⁢ a ⁢ l ⁢ t ⁢ y ≤ 1000 ⁢ k e 
 k 
 = slope of pressure-overclosure relationship 
 k p ⁢ e ⁢ n ⁢ a ⁢ l ⁢ t ⁢ y 
 = penalty stiffness 
 k e 
 = underlying element stiffness 
 1 Lagrange multipliers are always used, regardless of the
 constraint enforcement method or stiffness, in the following cases: design
 sensitivity analyses, direct steady-state dynamics analyses, analyses using the
 quasi-Newton method.