Contact Damping 
 Contact Damping Contact damping:
 can be defined to oppose the relative motion between the interacting
 surfaces (in addition to the contact pressure-overclosure relationships
 discussed in 
 Contact Pressure-Overclosure Relationships 
 and the friction models discussed in 
 Frictional Behavior );
 can affect both the motion normal and tangential to the surfaces;
 in the normal direction is proportional to the relative velocity
 between the surfaces;
 in the tangential direction is proportional to the relative tangential
 velocity in 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 and to the “elastic slip rate” associated with friction (see 
 Frictional Behavior 
 for a discussion of elastic slip) in 
 Abaqus/Explicit —hence,
 in 
 Abaqus/Explicit 
 it does not resist the bulk of tangential sliding;
 is not applicable for linear perturbation procedures;
 in 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 it contributes to the force and stiffness definition and should generally be
 used only when it is otherwise impossible to obtain a solution—the best method
 for allowing a viscous pressure and shear stress to be transmitted between the
 contact surfaces in 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 to reduce convergence difficulties due to the sudden violation of contact
 constraints (common in some snap-through and buckling problems involving
 contact) is to specify the damping on a step-by-step basis using contact
 controls, as discussed in 
 Automatic Stabilization of Rigid Body Motions in Contact Problems ;
 and
 can be useful in 
 Abaqus/Explicit 
 to reduce solution noise—a small amount of viscous contact damping is used by
 default for softened contact and penalty contact in 
 Abaqus/Explicit ,
 as discussed below.
 This page discusses: Defining Viscous Contact Damping for Relative Motions of Surfaces Choosing the Appropriate Coefficients for Viscous Damping in Abaqus/Standard 
 See Also About Mechanical Contact Properties In Other Guides *CONTACT DAMPING Creating interaction properties 
 Products Abaqus/Standard Abaqus/Explicit Abaqus/CAE 
 Defining Viscous Contact Damping for Relative Motions of Surfaces 
 In 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 the damping coefficient, μ ,
 is a function of surface clearance, as shown in 
 Figure 1 .
 The damping coefficient is defined as a proportionality constant with units of
 pressure divided by velocity.
 Figure 1. Damping coefficient-clearance relationship for viscous damping in 
 Abaqus/Standard . In 
 Abaqus/Explicit 
 the damping coefficient will remain at the specified constant value while the
 surfaces are in contact and at zero otherwise. The damping coefficient can be
 defined as a proportionality constant with units of pressure divided by
 velocity or as a unitless fraction of critical damping.
 To define viscous damping, you must include it in a contact property
 definition.
 Input File Usage Use both of the following options for surface-based
contact: SURFACE INTERACTION , NAME = interaction_property_name 
 CONTACT DAMPING Use both of the following options for element-based contact
in 
 Abaqus/Standard : INTERFACE or GAP , ELSET = name 
 CONTACT DAMPING Abaqus/CAE Usage Interaction module: contact property editor: Mechanical Damping Element-based contact is not supported in 
 Abaqus/CAE . 
 Damping and Pressure-Overclosure Relationships 
 In 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 the viscous damping relationship can be used with any contact relationship (see
 Contact Pressure-Overclosure Relationships ).
 In 
 Abaqus/Explicit 
 contact damping is not available for hard kinematic contact. Softened kinematic
 contact and all penalty contact will have default damping in the form of a
 critical damping fraction with μ 0 
 = 0.03.
 Specifying the Damping Coefficient Such That the Damping Force Is Directly Proportional to the Rate of Relative Motion between the Surfaces 
 You can specify damping directly in terms of the damping coefficient with
 units of pressure per velocity such that the damping forces will be calculated
 with f v ⁢ d = μ 0 ⁢ A ⁢ v r ⁢ e ⁢ l e ⁢ l ,
 where A is the nodal area and v r ⁢ e ⁢ l e ⁢ l 
 is the rate of relative motion between the two surfaces.
 For contact involving element-based surfaces and for element-based contact (available only in Abaqus/Standard ), the damping coefficient is specified in terms of contact pressure. For contact
 involving a node-based surface or nodal contact elements (such as
 GAP elements and
 ITT elements) for which an area or length
 dimension has not been defined, 
 μ 
 0 
 must be specified as force per velocity. For secondary surfaces on
 beam-type elements, specify 
 μ 
 0 
 as force per unit length per velocity. Input File Usage Use the following syntax in 
 Abaqus/Standard : CONTACT DAMPING , DEFINITION = DAMPING COEFFICIENT 
 μ 0 , c 0 , η Use the following syntax in 
 Abaqus/Explicit : CONTACT DAMPING , DEFINITION = DAMPING COEFFICIENT 
 μ 0 Abaqus/CAE Usage Use the following syntax in 
 Abaqus/Standard : Interaction module: contact property editor: Mechanical Damping : Definition: Damping coefficient , Linear or Bilinear , Damping Coeff. μ 0 , Clearance c and c 0 ( η =0 for Linear and η = c c 0 for Bilinear ) Use the following syntax in 
 Abaqus/Explicit : Interaction module: contact property editor: Mechanical Damping : Definition: Damping coefficient , Step , Damping Coeff. μ 0 
 Specifying the Damping Coefficient as a Fraction of Critical Damping in Abaqus/Explicit 
 In 
 Abaqus/Explicit  you
 can specify a unitless damping coefficient in terms of the fraction of critical
 damping associated with the contact stiffness; this method is not available in 
 Abaqus/Standard . The
 damping forces will be calculated with f v ⁢ d = μ 0 ⁢ 4 ⁢ m ⁢ k c ⁢ v r ⁢ e ⁢ l e ⁢ l ,
 where m is the nodal mass, k c 
 is the nodal contact stiffness (in units of F ⁢ L - 1 ),
 and v r ⁢ e ⁢ l e ⁢ l 
 is the rate of relative motion between the two surfaces.
 Input File Usage CONTACT DAMPING , DEFINITION = CRITICAL DAMPING FRACTION 
 critical damping fraction Abaqus/CAE Usage Interaction module: contact property editor: Mechanical Damping : Definition: Critical damping fraction , Crit. Damping Fraction critical damping fraction 
 Specifying the Tangential Damping Coefficient 
 You can specify the ratio of the tangential damping coefficient to the
 normal damping coefficient, also called the tangent fraction.
 The tangential damping uses the same form of damping as the normal damping.
 Tangential damping can be specified only in conjunction with normal damping. If
 tangential damping is activated in 
 Abaqus/Standard ,
 the damping stress is proportional to the relative tangential velocity. In 
 Abaqus/Explicit 
 tangential damping will be ignored if hard kinematic contact is used in the
 tangential direction or if friction is not defined. As stated previously,
 damping in the tangential direction in 
 Abaqus/Explicit 
 is proportional to the elastic slip rate (see 
 Frictional Behavior ) rather
 than the total rate of relative sliding.
 For 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 the default value for the tangent fraction is 0.0; therefore, by default, the
 damping coefficient for the tangential direction is zero. For 
 Abaqus/Explicit 
 the default value for the tangent fraction is 1.0; therefore, by default, the
 damping coefficient for the tangential direction is equal to the damping
 coefficient for the normal direction. Furthermore, in 
 Abaqus/Explicit 
 softened contact and hard penalty contact have a default critical damping
 fraction of 0.03.
 Input File Usage CONTACT DAMPING , TANGENT FRACTION = value Abaqus/CAE Usage Interaction module: contact property editor: Mechanical Damping : Tangent fraction: Specify value: value 
 Effect on the Increment Time in Abaqus/Explicit 
 Abaqus/Explicit accounts for the contact damping in the stable time increment calculation. Changing the
 default value might cause a significant drop in the stable time increment and, therefore,
 an increase in the solution time. Optionally, you can introduce contact mass scaling to
 the surface nodes in contact to avoid a reduction in the time increment (for more
 information, see Mass Scaling to Account for Contact Stiffness ). 
 Choosing the Appropriate Coefficients for Viscous Damping in Abaqus/Standard 
 In 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 the appropriate magnitude for the local contact damping factor,
 μ 0 ,
 is problem-dependent. In some cases a simple calculation can be used to
 determine the magnitude; in other cases a reasonable value for
 μ 0 
 must be determined by trial and error. A reasonable value is one that has
 minimal impact on the solution prior to the unstable behavior in the model. A
 preliminary value can be found by looking at the contact pressures and
 velocities in the model before damping is added, as described below.
 It may be difficult to determine the nodal velocities prior to the unstable
 behavior if output was not requested frequently. In such a situation the
 information in the message ( .msg ) file can be used to
 estimate the peak nodal velocity. By default, 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 provides the peak nodal displacement increment at every converged increment in
 this file. This displacement increment can be used along with the time
 increment to calculate a peak nodal velocity for the model. Although this
 velocity may not be very close to the actual relative velocity of the surfaces,
 it should be within an order of magnitude and is a reasonable value to use in
 calculating an initial viscous damping coefficient.
 The maximum contact pressure between the surfaces also needs to be
 estimated. The viscous damping coefficient should then be set to a value that
 is a few orders of magnitude less than the ratio of the estimated maximum
 contact pressure over the calculated nodal velocity.
 If it is not feasible to obtain the pressure and velocities as discussed
 above, a high damping value should be used initially and repeated analyses
 should be performed with smaller and smaller values. An appropriate value for
 μ 0 
 is one that is large enough to enable the analysis to get past any unstable
 response but not so large that the results at earlier or later times are
 affected significantly. 
 Snap-through buckling analysis of circular arches 
 demonstrates how the magnitude of the damping coefficient can be determined
 using the methods explained above.
 The following example outlines how the value might be chosen for a typical
 case. Consider a simple modification to the two-dimensional Euler column
 buckling problem: add rigid surfaces parallel and on either side of the column
 so that the beam will contact the surfaces when it buckles. As the axial load
 is increased beyond the buckling load, the column will flatten out against the
 surface. Then, the midpoint of contact will lift off the surface and the beam
 will buckle into a higher mode. 
 Figure 2 
 shows this shape.
 Figure 2. Constrained Euler buckling example for viscous damping. When the column first buckles, the contact force, F ,
 that the column exerts on one of the rigid surfaces can be approximated as 
 F ≈ π 2 ⁢ h 4 ⁢ l ⁢ ( P - P c ⁢ r ⁢ i ⁢ t ) , where h is the separation distance between the rigid
 surfaces, l is the beam length, P is
 the applied load, and P c ⁢ r ⁢ i ⁢ t 
 is the buckling load.
 The approximation of the contact force entails the assumption that a single
 point comes into contact and that the shape of the buckled column does not
 change. The units of μ 0 
 are contact force per velocity, assuming that a node-based surface is used in
 this model. The velocity of the column, v , at the point of
 contact can be approximated as 
 v ≈ h 2 ⁢ Δ ⁢ t , where Δ ⁢ t 
 is the time increment. These estimates for the contact force and the column
 velocity give a value for the damping coefficient: 
 μ 0 = F v ≈ Δ ⁢ t ⁢ π 2 2 ⁢ l ⁢ ( P - P c ⁢ r ⁢ i ⁢ t ) . This value can be used as a starting value, but different values should be
 tested.