Contact Initialization for General Contact in Abaqus/Standard 
 Contact Initialization for General Contact in Abaqus/Standard 
 You can specify whether initial overclosures should be resolved without generating
 stresses and strains or treated as interference fits that are gradually resolved over multiple
 increments. You can also specify nondefault search zones that determine which nodes are
 affected in the case of strain-free adjustments or interference fits. 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 initializes the contact state based on the gap or penetration state observed in
 the initial geometry. Small initial contact overclosures are resolved by
 default using strain-free adjustments to the positions of surface nodes. You
 can define alternative contact initialization methods and then assign them to
 contact interactions. For example, you can choose to have initial overclosures
 for certain interactions treated as interference fits. 
 This page discusses: Default Contact Initialization Method Defining Alternative Contact Initialization Methods Assigning Contact Initialization Methods 
 See Also About General Contact in Abaqus/Standard In Other Guides *CONTACT INITIALIZATION ASSIGNMENT *CONTACT INITIALIZATION DATA Creating contact initializations Specifying and modifying contact initialization assignments for general contact 
 Products Abaqus/Standard Abaqus/CAE 
 Default Contact Initialization Method 
 By default, the general contact algorithm adjusts the initial positions of surface nodes during
 preprocessing to remove small initial surface overclosures without generating strains or
 stresses in the model, as shown in Figure 1 . These adjustments are intended to correct only minor mismatches associated with mesh
 generation. Nodal adjustments are not allowed for any new contact activations at the step
 level. In such cases, initial overclosures are either avoided before activation or allowed
 to resolve by contact resulting in contact stresses. 
 Figure 1. Configuration of contact surfaces after strain-free adjustments to
 resolve overclosure. 
 General contact automatically assigns main and secondary roles for contact interactions, as
 discussed in Contact Controls Specific to General Contact in Abaqus/Standard . Abaqus/Standard calculates an overclosure tolerance based on the size of the underlying element facets on
 a secondary surface. Secondary surfaces in a particular interaction are repositioned onto
 the associated main surface (using strain-free adjustments) if the two surfaces are
 initially overclosed by a distance smaller than the calculated tolerance. Initial gaps
 between surfaces remain unchanged by default adjustments. If a portion of a secondary
 surface is initially overclosed by a distance greater than the calculated tolerance, Abaqus/Standard automatically generates a contact exclusion for this surface portion and its associated
 main surface. Therefore, general contact does not create interactions between surfaces (or
 portions of surfaces) that are severely overclosed in the initial configuration of the
 model, and these surfaces can freely penetrate each other throughout the analysis. 
 General contact uses the surface-to-surface contact formulation, so
 penetration/gap calculations are computed as averages over finite regions;
 therefore, it is possible for penetrations and gaps to be present at individual
 surface nodes after the adjustments. The default adjustments will not resolve
 initial crossings of two reference surfaces associated with shells or
 membranes, although techniques to resolve such cases are discussed in 
 Assigning Contact Initializations to Shell Surfaces .
 Defining Alternative Contact Initialization Methods 
 You can define alternative contact initialization methods if the default
 behavior is not desired. For example, you may want to increase the tolerance
 for deep penetrations or specify that certain openings should be adjusted to a
 “just touching” status. Furthermore, some analyses call for initial
 overclosures to be treated as interference fits rather than resolved with
 strain-free adjustments. To modify the contact initialization behavior, you
 must define one or more alternate contact initialization methods and then
 identify which surface pairings are to use which methods. 
 You assign a name to each contact initialization method. This name is used
 in the assignment of a contact initialization method to specific surface
 pairings (see 
 Assigning Contact Initialization Methods 
 below). 
 Input File Usage CONTACT INITIALIZATION DATA , NAME = contact_initialization_method_name 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage Interaction module : Interaction Contact Initialization Create : Name: contact_initialization_method_name 
 Increasing the Search Zones for Strain-Free Adjustments 
 As discussed above in Default Contact Initialization Method , initial gaps and large initial overclosures between surfaces are not adjusted by the
 default contact initialization methods. You can optionally specify nondefault search
 distances both above and below the surfaces in an interaction; secondary surfaces that lie
 within these search distances are repositioned directly onto their associated main surface
 using strain-free nodal adjustments. Abaqus/Standard takes shell thickness into account when calculating these search distances. 
 For new activations at the step level, strain-free nodal adjustments are not allowed and
 nodes on secondary surfaces are not repositioned. Instead, initial overclosures might have
 to be reconciled by precise positioning before activation while initial gaps might be
 resolved by establishing contact on activation with boundary motions to avoid rigid body
 modes. The subsequent discussion involving strain-free nodal adjustments applies only to
 the initial configuration. 
 Specifying a search distance above a surface is used to close small initial
 gaps between surfaces. Specifying a search distance below a surface is used to
 increase the default overclosure tolerance that 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 uses when performing strain-free adjustments; if you specify a search distance
 smaller than the default overclosure tolerance, 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 uses the default tolerance instead. As with the default initialization
 behavior, contact exclusions are created for initial overclosures that are
 larger than the specified search zone. 
 Increasing the extent of the search zones for strain-free adjustments can
 potentially increase the computational cost of an analysis. It is not generally
 recommended that you specify a large search zone since this may cause mesh
 distortion when nodes are repositioned over large distances. 
 Input File Usage CONTACT INITIALIZATION DATA , SEARCH ABOVE = a , SEARCH BELOW = b 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage Interaction module : Interaction Contact Initialization Create ; Abaqus/Standard contact initialization ; Resolve with strain-free adjustments : Ignore overclosures greater than: b , Ignore initial openings greater than: a 
 Specifying an Initial Clearance Distance 
 By default, the strain-free adjustments discussed above adjust initial nodal positions such that
 surfaces are “just-touching” (with zero penetration/separation). Alternatively, Abaqus/Standard can make the adjustments to achieve an initial clearance distance that you specify. The
 adjustments occur only for regions that satisfy the search zone tolerances, as discussed
 above. Mesh distortion can occur if large strain-free adjustments are required to achieve
 the specified initial clearance distance. Because nodal adjustments are not allowed for
 new activations in a step, this specification is ignored at the step level. Input File Usage CONTACT INITIALIZATION DATA , INITIAL CLEARANCE = h 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage Interaction module : Interaction Contact Initialization Create ; Abaqus/Standard contact initialization ; Specify clearance distance: h 
 Alternative General Contact Initialization Methods Based on Storing Offsets 
 You can specify an initial clearance to apply to general contact interactions in portions of the
 model where the small-sliding tracking approach is active or to interactions in heat
 transfer and coupled electrical-thermal procedures that have no mechanical degrees of
 freedom. Abaqus/Standard stores the difference between the specified clearance and the actual clearance (with or
 without nodal adjustments) as offsets. In addition, for small sliding you can also specify
 applicable contact directions during initialization. 
 Storing Offsets Instead of the Default Strain-Free Adjustments 
 By default, Abaqus/Standard resolves clearances and overclosures in general contact by adjusting the nodal
 coordinates without creating strain in the model. Alternatively, you can specify
 unresolved gaps and overclosures at the beginning of an analysis to store as offsets. In
 this case, all gaps within the search distance above the secondary surface and
 overclosures within the search distance below the secondary surface start out as a
 specified zero clearance. Abaqus/Standard ignores the nondefault specification for contact interactions with the finite-sliding
 tracking approach. 
 In situations where you specify an interference distance or an initial clearance distance,
 nodal adjustments are necessary to satisfy these specified initial gap or overclosure
 distances. In these situations, the specification to store additional offsets is
 ignored. Input File Usage CONTACT INITIALIZATION DATA , ADJUST = NO , SEARCH ABOVE = a , SEARCH BELOW = b Abaqus/CAE Usage 
 Storing offsets for contact initialization is not supported in 
 Abaqus/CAE . 
 Specifying Initial Clearance and/or Contact Directions Using Clearance Definitions for Small-Sliding Contact 
 You can refer to a named clearance definition to precisely specify initial clearances and/or
 contact directions. The different modes of specifying initial clearance using a named
 clearance definition carry over to defining contact initialization for general contact
 interactions in portions of the model where the small-sliding tracking approach is
 active or for interactions in heat transfer and coupled electrical-thermal procedures
 that have no mechanical degrees of freedom. However, such a specification is ignored for
 finite-sliding contact. When node numbers or node sets are specified in a named
 clearance definition and they are not associated with surfaces to which the contact
 initialization is eventually assigned, an error message is issued. A typical use case
 involves referring to a named clearance and specifying that nodal adjustments should be
 avoided. Input File Usage CONTACT INITIALIZATION DATA , INITIAL CLEARANCE = clearanceName , ADJUST = NO 
 *CLEARANCE , NAME = clearanceName , TABULAR Abaqus/CAE Usage 
 Specifying initial clearance and/or contact directions for contact
 initialization is not supported in 
 Abaqus/CAE . 
 Modeling Interference Fits 
 Optionally, the general contact algorithm in Abaqus/Standard can treat overclosures as interference fits. The general contact algorithm uses a
 shrink-fit method to gradually resolve the interference distance over the step of the
 analysis (if multiple load increments are used for the step) as shown in Figure 2 , such that the fraction of the interference resolved up to and including a particular
 increment approximately corresponds to the fraction of the step completed. Stresses and
 strains are generated as the interference is resolved. Gradually resolving interference
 over several increments improves robustness (compared to always resolving the full
 interference in the first increment, which is the default for contact pairs) for cases in
 which a nonlinear response occurs for “interference-fit loading.” It is generally
 recommended that you do not apply other loads while the interference fit is being
 resolved. 
 Figure 2. Gradual resolution of contact interference fit. 
 Because contact conditions are enforced in an average sense in a region around each constraint
 location for the surface-to-surface contact formulation used by general contact in Abaqus/Standard , penetrations or gaps may be observed at secondary nodes when surface-to-surface
 constraints are in a zero-penetration state. Input File Usage CONTACT INITIALIZATION DATA , INTERFERENCE FIT 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage Interaction module : Interaction Contact Initialization Create ; Abaqus/Standard contact initialization ; Treat as interference fits 
 Increasing the Tolerance for Interference Fits 
 Abaqus/Standard calculates an overclosure tolerance based on the size of the underlying element
 facets on a secondary surface (see Default Contact Initialization Method above). An interference fit between two surfaces affects only those secondary
 surfaces that are overclosed by a distance smaller than the calculated tolerance;
 contact is ignored entirely for surfaces that are overclosed by a distance greater than
 the calculated tolerance. 
 Optionally, you can redefine the overclosure tolerance to include larger
 overclosures in the interference fit. If you specify a tolerance that is
 smaller than the default calculated tolerance, 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 uses the default calculated tolerance instead. 
 Input File Usage CONTACT INITIALIZATION DATA , INTERFERENCE FIT , 
 SEARCH BELOW = b 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage Interaction module : Interaction Contact Initialization Create ; Abaqus/Standard contact initialization ; Treat as interference fits : Ignore overclosures greater than: b 
 Specifying the Interference Distance 
 By default, the interference distance is implied by the initial overclosure of the mesh in the
 initial configuration or when surfaces are newly activated in a step; alternatively, you
 can specify the interference distance in the initial configuration. In this case Abaqus/Standard first makes strain-free adjustments of nodal positions such that the initial
 overclosure in the adjusted configuration corresponds to the specified interference
 distance and then invokes the shrink fit method discussed above, as depicted in Figure 3 . Mesh distortion can occur if large strain-free adjustments are required to achieve
 the specified interference distance. Because strain-free nodal adjustments are not
 allowed for new contact activations at the step level, the interference distance
 specification is ignored; instead, the physical overclosure is resolved. 
 Figure 3. Treatment of a specified interference distance that differs from the
 interference implied by the original mesh. 
 The search region for the strain-free adjustments and subsequent shrink
 fit resolution is at least as large as the search region for the case discussed
 previously in which the interference distance is not specified. The search
 region will include overclosures at least as large as the specified
 interference fit and openings at least as large as the optionally specified
 search distance above a surface. 
 Input File Usage CONTACT INITIALIZATION DATA , INTERFERENCE FIT = h , SEARCH ABOVE = a , SEARCH BELOW = b 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage Interaction module : Interaction Contact Initialization Create ; Abaqus/Standard contact initialization ; Treat as interference fits : Specify interference distance: h : Ignore overclosures greater than: b , Ignore initial openings greater than: a 
 Deactivating Friction While Resolving Interference Fits 
 The presence of a friction model can degrade the robustness of resolving interference fits. It
 is generally recommended that you temporarily deactivate friction models while Abaqus/Standard resolves interference fits. You can deactivate the friction model in the step while
 interference fits are resolved using the “change friction” method discussed in Changing Friction Properties during an Abaqus/Standard Analysis . 
 Cases in Which Interference Fit Resolution with Contact Pairs Is Preferred 
 Large interferences may be difficult to resolve with the surface-to-surface formulation. Using
 this formulation, overclosures tend to be resolved along the secondary facet normal
 directions; using the node-to-surface formulation, which is available only with the
 contact pair algorithm, overclosures tend to be resolved along the main surface normal
 directions. Figure 4 illustrates a case where differing normal directions lead to undesirable tangential
 motion during an interference fit. In some cases it may be preferable to resolve large
 initial overclosures with node-to-surface discretization using the contact pair
 algorithm (see Modeling Contact Interference Fits in Abaqus/Standard ). 
 Figure 4. Comparison of contact formulations in an example with a large
 interference fit. 
 Assigning Contact Initialization Methods 
 You can assign contact initialization methods to selected surface pairings. 
 The surface names used in the assignment of contact initialization methods do not have to
 correspond to the surface names used to specify the general contact domain. In many cases
 nondefault contact initialization methods are assigned to a subset of the overall general
 contact domain. Any contact initialization assignments for regions that fall outside of the
 general contact domain are ignored. The last assignment takes precedence if the specified
 interactions overlap. In the case of step-dependent contact activation, contact
 initialization specified in a new step takes precedence over the methods specified in
 previous steps or at the model level. Input File Usage Use the following option to assign contact initialization methods: CONTACT INITIALIZATION ASSIGNMENT 
 surface_1 , surface_2 , contact_initialization_method_name This option must be used in conjunction with the 
 CONTACT option. The data line can be repeated as often as
necessary to assign contact initialization methods to different regions. 
 If the first surface name is omitted, a default surface that encompasses
the entire general contact domain is assumed. If the second surface name is
omitted or is the same as the first surface name, contact between the first
surface and itself is assumed. Keep in mind that surfaces can be defined to
span multiple unattached bodies, so self-contact is not limited to contact of a
single body with itself. If the contact initialization method name is omitted, the default contact initialization
 method in Abaqus/Standard is assumed. If a contact initialization method name is specified, it must also appear
 as the value of the NAME parameter on a
 CONTACT INITIALIZATION ASSIGNMENT 
 option. 
 Abaqus/CAE Usage Interaction module: Create Interaction : General contact (Standard) : 
 Contact Properties : Initialization assignments: Edit : select the surfaces and the initialization in the columns on the left, and click the arrows in the middle to transfer them to the list of contact initialization assignments 
 Assigning Contact Initializations to Shell Surfaces 
 The surfaces in a contact initialization assignment can be either single- or
 double-sided. Single-sided surfaces must have consistent surface normal
 orientations for adjacent faces. Strain-free adjustments will not move surface
 nodes past the reference surface of the opposing surface if the assignment of a
 contact initialization method is made with double-sided surfaces. 
 Using single-sided surfaces in the assignment of a contact initialization method for shells or
 membranes provides enhanced control over contact initialization for cases in which shell
 or membrane reference surfaces are initially crossed or are initially on the wrong side of
 each other. Figure 5 shows examples of adjustments for nearby segments of shell surfaces. For the case shown
 on the left it is assumed that single-sided surfaces with normal directions pointing away
 from each other are used in the assignment of the contact initialization method. In this
 case nodes are moved across the opposing reference surface during the strain-free
 adjustments. 
 For the case shown on the right in 
 Figure 5 
 it is assumed that single-sided surfaces with normal directions pointing toward
 each other are used in the assignment of the contact initialization method. In
 this case an initial gap is observed between the single-sided surfaces (which
 is also the case if double-sided surfaces are used in the contact
 initialization assignment). No strain-free adjustments will be made by default
 for openings such as this; however, if a nondefault contact initialization
 method is specified with an initial opening search tolerance set to a value
 exceeding the initial separation distance, strain-free adjustments will close
 the gap as shown in the figure (without moving nodes past the opposing
 reference surface). 
 Examples 
 The following contact initialization assignments are specified below as model or step data in a
 general contact analysis with the corresponding contact initialization data specified once
 at the model level: 
 a global assignment of shrink_fit to the
 entire general contact domain; 
 a local assignment of shrink_fit_local to
 contact between surfaces surface_A and
 surface_B —the search zone is specified
 explicitly to increase the default overclosure tolerance; 
 a local assignment of the default 
 Abaqus 
 contact initialization method to contact between
 surface_C and
 surface_D ; and 
 a local assignment of sfa_pickside to
 contact between double-sided surfaces surface_1 
 and surface_2 by specifying one side of each
 surface, surface_1_TOP and
 surface_2_BOTTOM , in the data lines (see bottom
 left of 
 Figure 5 ).
 Figure 5. Strain-free adjustments during contact initialization for
 single-sided shell surfaces. 
 CONTACT INITIALIZATION DATA , NAME=shrink_fit, INTERFERENCE FIT
 CONTACT INITIALIZATION DATA , NAME=shrink_fit_local,
 INTERFERENCE FIT, SEARCH BELOW = 15.0
 CONTACT INITIALIZATION DATA , NAME=sfa_pickside, 
 SEARCH BELOW = 10.0
…
 CONTACT 
 CONTACT INCLUSIONS , ALL EXTERIOR
 CONTACT INITIALIZATION ASSIGNMENT 
 , , shrink_fit 
surface_A, surface_B, shrink_fit_local
surface_C, surface_D, 
surface_1_TOP, surface_2_BOTTOM, sfa_pickside