Solid element formulation 
 Solid element formulation All the solid elements in 
 Abaqus 
 allow for finite strain and rotation in large-displacement analysis.
 See Also In Other Guides Solid (Continuum) Elements 
 Products Abaqus/Standard Abaqus/Explicit For kinematically linear analysis the strain is defined as 
 ε = sym ⁢ ( ∂ ⁡ u ∂ ⁡ X ) , where u 
 is the total displacement and X 
 is the spatial position of the point under consideration in the original
 configuration. As discussed in 
 Introduction and Basic Equations 
 this measure of strain is useful only if the strains and rotations are small
 (all components of the strain and rotation matrices are negligible compared to
 unity).
 For cases where the strains and/or rotations are no longer small, two ways
 of measuring strain are used in the solid elements in 
 Abaqus .
 When the hyperelastic or hyperfoam material definition is used with an element,
 Abaqus 
 internally uses the stretch values calculated directly from the deformation
 gradient matrix, F ,
 to compute the material behavior. With any other material behavior it is
 assumed that any elastic strains are small compared to unity, so the
 appropriate reference configuration for the elasticity is only infinitesimally
 different from the current configuration and the appropriate stress measure is,
 therefore, the Cauchy (“true”) stress. (More precisely, the appropriate stress
 measure should be the Kirchhoff stress defined with respect to the elastic
 reference configuration, but the assumption that this reference configuration
 and the current configuration are only infinitesimally different makes the
 Kirchhoff and Cauchy stress measures almost the same: the differences are on
 the order of the elastic strains compared to unity). The conjugate strain rate
 to Cauchy stress is the rate of deformation, 
 D = sym ⁢ ( ∂ v ∂ x ) , where v 
 is the velocity at a point and x 
 are the current spatial coordinates of the point. The strain is, therefore,
 defined as the integral of the rate of deformation. This integration is
 nontrivial, particularly in the general case where the principal axes of strain
 rotate during the deformation. In 
 Abaqus 
 the total strain is constructed by integrating the strain rate approximately
 over the increment by the central difference algorithm; and, when the strain
 components are referred to a fixed coordinate basis, the strain at the start of
 the increment must also be rotated to account for the rigid body rotation that
 occurs in the increment. This is also done approximately, using the 
 Hughes-Winget
 (1980) method. This integration algorithm defines the integration of a
 tensor associated with the material behavior as 
 a t + Δ ⁢ t = Δ ⁢ R ⋅ a t ⋅ Δ ⁢ R T + Δ ⁢ a ˇ ⁢ ( Δ ⁢ D ) , where a 
 is the tensor; Δ ⁢ a ˇ 
 is the increment in the tensor associated with the material's constitutive
 behavior, and, therefore, dependent on the strain increment,
 Δ ⁢ D ,
 defined by the central difference formula as 
 Δ ⁢ D = sym ⁢ ( ∂ ⁡ Δ ⁢ u ∂ ⁡ x t + Δ ⁢ t / 2 ) , where x t + Δ ⁢ t / 2 = ( 1 / 2 ) ⁢ ( x t + x t + Δ ⁢ t ) ;
 and Δ ⁢ R 
 is the increment in rotation, defined by Hughes and Winget as 
 Δ ⁢ R = ( I - 1 2 ⁢ Δ ⁢ W ) - 1 ⋅ ( I + 1 2 ⁢ Δ ⁢ W ) , where Δ ⁢ W 
 is the central difference integration of the rate of spin: 
 Δ ⁢ W = asym ⁢ ( ∂ ⁡ Δ ⁢ u ∂ ⁡ x t + Δ ⁢ t / 2 ) . A somewhat different algorithm to calculate Δ ⁢ R 
 is used for the Green-Naghdi rate in 
 Abaqus/Explicit .
 For example, the stress is integrated by this method as 
 σ t + Δ ⁢ t = Δ ⁢ R ⋅ σ t ⋅ Δ ⁢ R T + Δ ⁢ σ ˇ ⁢ ( Δ ⁢ D ) , where Δ ⁢ σ ˇ ⁢ ( Δ ⁢ D ) 
 is the stress increment caused by the straining of the material during this
 time increment and σ 
 is the Cauchy stress. The subscripts t and
 t + Δ ⁢ t 
 refer to the beginning and the end of the increment, respectively.
 As shown in 
 About procedures and basic equations ,
 the contribution of the internal work terms to the Jacobian of the Newton
 method that is often used in 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 is 
 (1) ∫ V ( d σ : δ D + σ : d δ D ) d V , where d ⁢ σ 
 and σ 
 are evaluated at the end of the increment.
 Using the integration definition above, it can be shown that 
 d ⁢ σ t + Δ ⁢ t = d ⁢ Δ ⁢ R ⋅ Δ ⁢ R T ⋅ ( σ t + Δ ⁢ t - Δ ⁢ σ ˇ ) + ( σ t + Δ ⁢ t - Δ ⁢ σ ˇ ) ⋅ Δ ⁢ R ⋅ d ⁢ Δ ⁢ R T + C : d ⁢ Δ ⁢ D , where C 
 is the Jacobian matrix of the constitutive model: 
 C = ∂ ⁡ Δ ⁢ σ ˇ ∂ ⁡ Δ ⁢ D . However, rather than computing the tangent matrix for the Newton method on
 this basis, we approximate this by using 
 d ⁢ σ t + Δ ⁢ t = d ⁢ W ⋅ σ t + Δ ⁢ t + σ t + Δ ⁢ t ⋅ d ⁢ W T + C : d ⁢ D , which yields the Jacobian 
 ∫ V ( δ D : C : d D - σ : ( 2 δ D ⋅ d D - ∂ ⁡ δ ⁢ v ∂ ⁡ x T ⋅ ∂ ⁡ d ⁢ v ∂ ⁡ x ) ) d V . This Jacobian is the tangent stiffness of the rate form of the problem.
 Experience with practical cases suggests that this approximation provides an
 acceptable rate of convergence in the Newton iterations in most applications
 with real materials.
 The strain and rotation measures described above are approximations.
 Probably the most limiting aspect of these approximations is the definition of
 the rotation increment Δ ⁢ R .
 While this measure does give a representation of the rotation of the material
 at a point in some average sense (both in 
 Abaqus/Standard 
 and 
 Abaqus/Explicit ),
 it is clear that each of the individual material fibers at a point has a
 different rotation (unless the material point undergoes rigid body motion only
 or, as an approximate extension, if the strains at the point are small). This
 suggests that the formulation described above will not be suitable for
 applications where the strains and rotations are large and where the material
 exhibits some form of anisotropic behavior. A common example of such cases is
 the induction of anisotropy through straining, as in “kinematic hardening”
 plasticity models. The integration methods described above are not suitable for
 such material models at large strains (for practical purposes with typical
 material parameters this means that the solutions will be quite wrong when the
 strains are greater than 20%–30%). Therefore, the use of the kinematic
 hardening model in 
 Abaqus 
 at such strain levels is not recommended. There is extensive literature on this
 subject; for example, see 
 Agah-Tehrani
 et al. (1986) .